---
layout: default
title: APA Transgender Guidelines
parent: Sources
permalink: /library/sources/apa-transgender-guidelines
---

# APA Transgender Guidelines

Source: <https://www.apa.org/practice/guidelines/transgender.pdf>
Archived: </library/assets/pdf/transgender.pdf>

# Guidelines for Psychological Practice With Transgender and Gender Nonconforming People

### American Psychological Association

---

Transgender and gender nonconforming[^1] (TGNC) people are those who
have a gender identity that is not fully aligned with their sex assigned
at birth. The existence of TGNC people has been documented in a range of
historical cultures (Coleman, Colgan, & Gooren, 1992; Feinberg, 1996;
Miller & Nichols, 2012; Schmidt, 2003). Current population estimates of
TGNC people have ranged from 0.17 to 1,333 per 100,000 (Meier & Labuski,
2013). The Massachusetts Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey
found 0.5% of the adult population aged 18 to 64 years identified as
TGNC between 2009 and 2011 (Conron, Scott, Stowell, & Landers, 2012).
However, population estimates likely underreport the true number of TGNC
people, given difficulties in collecting comprehensive demographic
information about this group (Meier & Labuski, 2013). Within the last
two decades, there has been a significant increase in research about
TGNC people. This increase in knowledge, informed by the TGNC community,
has resulted in the development of progressively more trans-affirmative
practice across the multiple health disciplines involved in the care of
TGNC people (Bockting, Knudson, & Goldberg, 2006; Coleman et al., 2012).
Research has documented the extensive experiences of stigma and
discrimination reported by TGNC people (Grant et al., 2011) and the
mental health consequences of these experiences across the life span
(Bockting, Miner, Swinburne Romine, Hamilton, & Coleman, 2013),
including increased rates of depression (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al.,
2014) and suicidality (Clements-Nolle, Marx, & Katz, 2006). TGNC
people's lack of access to trans-affirmative mental and physical health
care is a common barrier (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al., 2014; Garofalo,
Deleon, Osmer, Doll, & Harper, 2006; Grossman & D'Augelli, 2006), with
TGNC people sometimes being denied care because of their gender identity
(Xavier et al., 2012).

In 2009, the American Psychological Association (APA) Task Force on
Gender Identity and Gender Variance (TFGIGV) survey found that less than
30% of psychologist and graduate student participants reported
familiarity with issues that TGNC people experience (APA TFGIGV,
2009). Psychologists and other mental health professionals who have
limited training and experience in TGNC-affirmative care may cause harm
to TGNC people (Mikalson, Pardo, & Green, 2012; Xavier et al., 2012).
The significant level of societal stigma and discrimination that TGNC
people face, the associated mental health consequences, and
psychologists' lack of familiarity with trans-affirmative care led the
APA Task Force to recommend that psychological practice guidelines be
developed to help psychologists maximize the effectiveness of services
offered and avoid harm when working with TGNC people and their families.

## Purpose

The purpose of the *Guidelines for Psychological Practice with
Transgender and Gender Nonconforming People* (hereafter *Guidelines*) is
to assist psychologists in the provision of culturally competent,
developmentally appropriate, and trans-affirmative psychological
practice with TGNC people. Trans-affirmative practice is the provision
of care that is respectful, aware, and supportive of the identities and
life experiences of TGNC people (Korell & Lorah, 2007). The *Guidelines*
are an introductory resource for psychologists who will encounter TGNC
people in their practice, but can also be useful for psychologists with
expertise in this area of practice to improve the care already offered
to TGNC people. The *Guidelines* include a set of definitions for
readers who may be less familiar with language used when discussing
gender identity and TGNC populations (see Appendix A). Distinct from
TGNC, the term "cisgender" is used to refer to people whose sex assigned
at birth is aligned with their gender identity (E. R. Green, 2006;
Serano, 2006).

Given the added complexity of working with TGNC and gender-questioning
youth[^2] and the limitations of the available research, the
*Guidelines* focus primarily, though not exclusively, on TGNC adults.
Future revisions of the *Guidelines* will deepen a focus on TGNC and
genderquestioning children and adolescents. The *Guidelines* address the
strengths of TGNC people, the challenges they face, ethical and legal
issues, life span considerations, research, education, training, and
health care. Because issues of gender identity are often conflated with
issues of gender expression or sexual orientation, psychological
practice with the TGNC population warrants the acquisition of specific
knowledge about concerns unique to TGNC people that are not addressed by
other practice guidelines (APA, 2012). It is important to note that
these *Guidelines* are not intended to address some of the conflicts
that cisgender people may experience due to societal expectations
regarding gender roles (Butler, 1990), nor are they intended to address
intersex people (Dreger, 1999; Preves, 2003).

## Documentation of Need

In 2005, the APA Council of Representatives authorized the creation of
the Task Force on Gender Identity and Gender Variance (TFGIGV), charging
the Task Force to review APA policies related to TGNC people and to
offer recommendations for APA to best meet the needs of TGNC people (APA
TFGIGV, 2009). In 2009, the APA Council of Representatives adopted the
Resolution on Transgender, Gender Identity, & Gender Expression
Non-Discrimination, which calls upon psychologists in their professional
roles to provide appropriate, nondiscriminatory treatment; encourages
psychologists to take a leadership role in working against
discrimination; supports the provision of adequate and necessary mental
and medical health care; recognizes the efficacy, benefit, and medical
necessity of gender transition; supports access to appropriate treatment
in institutional settings; and supports the creation of educational
resources for all psychologists (Anton, 2009). In 2009, in an extensive
report on the current state of psychological practice with TGNC people,
the TFGIGV determined that there was sufficient knowledge and expertise
in the field to warrant the development of practice guidelines for TGNC
populations (APA TFGIGV, 2009). The report identified that TGNC people
constituted a population with unique needs and that the creation of
practice guidelines would be a valuable resource for the field (APA
TFGIGV, 2009). Psychologists' relative lack of knowledge about TGNC
people and trans-affirmative care, the level of societal stigma and
discrimination that TGNC people face, and the significant mental health
consequences that TGNC people experience as a result offer a compelling
need for psychological practice guidelines for this population.

## Users

The intended audience for these *Guidelines* includes psychologists who
provide clinical care, conduct research, or provide education or
training. Given that gender identity issues can arise at any stage in a
TGNC person's life (Lev, 2004), clinicians can encounter a TGNC person
in practice or have a client's presenting problem evolve into an issue
related to gender identity and gender expression. Researchers,
educators, and trainers will benefit from use of these *Guidelines* to
inform their work, even when not specifically focused on TGNC
populations. Psychologists who focus on TGNC populations in their
clinical practice, research, or educational and training activities will
also benefit from the use of these *Guidelines*.

## Distinction Between Standards and Guidelines

When using these *Guidelines*, psychologists should be aware that APA
has made an important distinction between *standards* and *guidelines*
(Reed, McLaughlin, & Newman, 2002). Standards are mandates to which all
psychologists must adhere (e.g., the *Ethical Principles of
Psychologists and Code of Conduct*; APA, 2010), whereas guidelines are
aspirational. Psychologists are encouraged to use these *Guidelines* in
tandem with the *Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of
Conduct*, and should be aware that state and federal laws may override
these *Guidelines* (APA, 2010).

In addition, these *Guidelines* refer to psychological practice (e.g.,
clinical work, consultation, education, research, and training) rather
than treatment. Practice guidelines are practitioner-focused and provide
guidance for professionals regarding "conduct and the issues to be
considered in particular areas of clinical practice" (Reed et al., 2002,
p. 1044). Treatment guidelines are client-focused and address
intervention-specific recommendations for a clinical population or
condition (Reed et al., 2002). The current *Guidelines* are intended to
complement treatment guidelines for TGNC people seeking mental health
services, such as those set forth by the World Professional Association
for Transgender Health Standards of Care (Coleman et al., 2012) and the
Endocrine Society (Hembree et al., 2009).

## Compatibility

These *Guidelines* are consistent with the APA *Ethical*#
*Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct* (APA, 2010), the
*Standards of Accreditation for Health Service Psychology* (APA, 2015),
the APA TFGIGV (2009) report, and the APA Council of Representatives
Resolution on Transgender, Gender Identity, & Gender Expression
NonDiscrimination (Anton, 2009).

## Practice Guidelines Development Process

To address one of the recommendations of the APA TFGIGV (2009), the APA
Committee on Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity (CSOGD; then the
Committee on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Concerns) and
Division 44 (the Society for the Psychological Study of Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual and Transgender Issues) initiated a joint Task Force on
Psychological Practice Guidelines with Transgender and Gender
Nonconforming People in 2011. Task Force members were selected through
an application and review process conducted by the leadership of CSOGD
and Division 44. The Task Force included 10 members who had substantial
psychological practice expertise with TGNC people. Of the 10 task force
members, five individuals identified as TGNC with a range of gender
identities and five identified as cisgender. In terms of race/ethnicity,
six of the task force members identified as White and four identified as
people of color (one Indian American, one Chinese American, one Latina
American, and one mixed race).

The Task Force conducted a comprehensive review of the extant
scholarship, identified content most pertinent to the practice of
psychology with TGNC people, and evaluated the level of evidence to
support guidance within each guideline. To ensure the accuracy and
comprehensiveness of these *Guidelines*, Task Force members met with
TGNC community members and groups and consulted with subject matter
experts within and outside of psychology. When the Task Force discovered
a lack of professional consensus, every effort was made to include
divergent opinions in the field relevant to that issue. When this
occurred, the Task Force described the various approaches documented in
the literature. Additionally, these *Guidelines* were informed by
comments received at multiple presentations held at professional
conferences and comments obtained through two cycles of open public
comment on earlier *Guideline* drafts.

This document contains 16 guidelines for TGNC psychological practice.
Each guideline includes a Rationale section, which reviews relevant
scholarship supporting the need for the guideline, and an Application
section, which describes how the particular guideline may be applied in
psychological practice. The *Guidelines* are organized into five
clusters: (a) foundational knowledge and awareness; (b) stigma,
discrimination, and barriers to care; (c) life span development; (d)
assessment, therapy, and intervention; and (e) research, education, and
training.

Funding for this project was provided by Division 44 (Society for the
Psychological Study of LGBT Issues); the APA Office on Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) Concerns; a grant from the Committee on
Division/APA Relations (CODAPAR); and donations from Randall Ehrbar and
Pamela St. Amand. Some members of the Task Force have received
compensation through presentations (e.g., honoraria) or royalties (e.g.,
book contracts) based in part on information contained in these
*Guidelines.*

## Selection of Evidence

Although the number of publications on the topic of TGNC-affirmative
practice has been increasing, this is still an emerging area of
scholarly literature and research. When possible, the Task Force relied
on peer-reviewed publications, but books, chapters, and reports that do
not typically receive a high level of peer review have also been cited
when appropriate. These sources are from a diverse range of fields
addressing mental health, including psychology, counseling, social work,
and psychiatry. Some studies of TGNC people utilize small sample sizes,
which limits the generalizability of results. Few studies of TGNC people
utilize probability samples or randomized control groups (e.g., Conron
et al., 2012; Dhejne et al., 2011). As a result, the Task Force relied
primarily on studies using convenience samples, which limits the
generalizability of results to the population as a whole, but can be
adequate for describing issues and situations that arise within the
population.

## Foundational Knowledge and Awareness

***Guideline 1. Psychologists understand that gender is a nonbinary
construct that allows for a range of gender identities and that a
person's gender identity may not align with sex assigned at birth.***

***Rationale.*** Gender identity is defined as a person's deeply felt,
inherent sense of being a girl, woman, or female; a boy, a man, or male;
a blend of male or female; or an alternative gender (Bethea & McCollum,
2013; Institute of Medicine \[IOM\], 2011). In many cultures and
religious traditions, gender has been perceived as a binary construct,
with mutually exclusive categories of male or female, boy or girl, man
or woman (Benjamin, 1966; Mollenkott, 2001; Tanis, 2003). These mutually
exclusive categories include an assumption that gender identity is
always in alignment with sex assigned at birth (Bethea & McCollum,
2013). For TGNC people, gender identity differs from sex assigned at
birth to varying degrees, and may be experienced and expressed outside
of the gender binary (Harrison, Grant, & Herman, 2012; Kuper, Nussbaum,
& Mustanski, 2012).

Gender as a nonbinary construct has been described and studied for
decades (Benjamin, 1966; Herdt, 1994; Kulick, 1998). There is historical
evidence of recognition, societal acceptance, and sometimes reverence of
diversity in gender identity and gender expression in several different
cultures (Coleman et al., 1992; Feinberg, 1996; Miller & Nichols, 2012;
Schmidt, 2003). Many cultures in which gender nonconforming persons and
groups were visible were diminished by westernization, colonialism, and
systemic inequity (Nanda, 1999). In the 20th century, TGNC expression
became medicalized (Hirschfeld, 1910/1991), and medical interventions to
treat discordance between a person's sex assigned at birth, secondary
sex characteristics, and gender identity became available (Meyerowitz,
2002).

As early as the 1950s, research found variability in how an individual
described their[^3] gender, with some participants reporting a gender
identity different from the culturally defined, mutually exclusive
categories of "man" or "woman" (Benjamin, 1966). In several recent large
online studies of the TGNC population in the United States, 30% to 40%
of participants identified their gender identity as other than man or
woman (Harrison et al., 2012; Kuper et al., 2012). Although some studies
have cultivated a broader understanding of gender (Conron, Scout, &
Austin, 2008), the majority of research has required a forced choice
between man and woman, thus failing to represent or depict those with
different gender identities (IOM, 2011). Research over the last two
decades has demonstrated the existence of a wide spectrum of gender
identity and gender expression (Bockting, 2008; Harrison et al., 2012;
Kuper et al., 2012), which includes people who identify as either man or
woman, neither man nor woman, a blend of man and woman, or a unique
gender identity. A person's identification as TGNC can be healthy and
self-affirming, and is not inherently pathological (Coleman et al.,
2012). However, people may experience distress associated with
discordance between their gender identity and their body or sex assigned
at birth, as well as societal stigma and discrimination (Coleman et al.,
2012).

Between the late 1960s and the early 1990s, health care to alleviate
gender dysphoria largely reinforced a binary conceptualization of gender
(APA TFGIGV, 2009; Bolin, 1994; Hastings, 1974). At that time, it was
considered an ideal outcome for TGNC people to conform to an identity
that aligned with either sex assigned at birth or, if not possible, with
the "opposite" sex, with a heavy emphasis on blending into the cisgender
population or "passing" (APA TFGIGV, 2009; Bolin, 1994; Hastings, 1974).
Variance from these options could raise concern for health care
providers about a TGNC person's ability to transition successfully.
These concerns could act as a barrier to accessing surgery or hormone
therapy because medical and mental health care provider endorsement was
required before surgery or hormones could be accessed (Berger et al.,
1979). Largely because of self-advocacy of TGNC individuals and
communities in the 1990s, combined with advances in research and models
of trans-affirmative care, there is greater recognition and
acknowledgment of a spectrum of gender diversity and corresponding
individualized, TGNCspecific health care (Bockting et al., 2006; Coleman
et al., 2012).

***Application.*** A nonbinary understanding of gender is fundamental to
the provision of affirmative care for TGNC people. Psychologists are
encouraged to adapt or modify their understanding of gender, broadening
the range of variation viewed as healthy and normative. By understanding
the spectrum of gender identities and gender expressions that exist, and
that a person's gender identity may not be in full alignment with sex
assigned at birth, psychologists can increase their capacity to assist
TGNC people, their families, and their communities (Lev, 2004).
Respecting and supporting TGNC people in authentically articulating
their gender identity and gender expression, as well as their lived
experience, can improve TGNC people's health, well-being, and quality of
life (Witten, 2003).

Some TGNC people may have limited access to visible, positive TGNC role
models. As a result, many TGNC people are isolated and must cope with
the stigma of gender nonconformity without guidance or support,
worsening the negative effect of stigma on mental health
(FredriksenGoldsen et al., 2014; Singh, Hays, & Watson, 2011).
Psychologists may assist TGNC people in challenging gender norms and
stereotypes, and in exploring their unique gender identity and gender
expression. TGNC people, partners, families, friends, and communities
can benefit from education about the healthy variation of gender
identity and gender expression, and the incorrect assumption that gender
identity automatically aligns with sex assigned at birth.

Psychologists may model an acceptance of ambiguity as TGNC people
develop and explore aspects of their gender, especially in childhood and
adolescence. A nonjudgmental stance toward gender nonconformity can help
to counteract the pervasive stigma faced by many TGNC people and provide
a safe environment to explore gender identity and make informed
decisions about gender expression.

***Guideline 2. Psychologists understand that gender identity and sexual
orientation are distinct but interrelated constructs.***

***Rationale.*** The constructs of gender identity and sexual
orientation are theoretically and clinically distinct, even though
professionals and nonprofessionals frequently conflate them. Although
some research suggests a potential link in the development of gender
identity and sexual orientation, the mechanisms of such a relationship
are unknown (Adelson & American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry \[AACAP\] Committee on Quality Issues \[CQI\], 2012; APA
TFGIGV, 2009; A. H. Devor, 2004; Drescher & Byne, 2013). *Sexual
orientation* is defined as a person's sexual and/or emotional attraction
to another person (Shively & De Cecco, 1977), compared with *gender
identity*, which is defined by a person's felt, inherent sense of
gender. For most people, gender identity develops earlier than sexual
orientation. Gender identity is often established in young toddlerhood
(Adelson & AACAP CQI, 2012; Kohlberg, 1966), compared with awareness of
same-sex attraction, which often emerges in early adolescence (Adelson &
AACAP CQI, 2012; D'Augelli & Hershberger, 1993; Herdt & Boxer, 1993;
Ryan, 2009; Savin-Williams & Diamond, 2000). Although gender identity is
usually established in childhood, individuals may become aware that
their gender identity is not in full alignment with sex assigned at
birth in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood. The developmental pathway
of gender identity typically includes a progression through multiple
stages of awareness, exploration, expression, and identity integration
(Bockting & Coleman, 2007; A. H. Devor, 2004; Vanderburgh, 2007).
Similarly, a person's sexual orientation may progress through multiple
stages of awareness, exploration, and identity through adolescence and
into adulthood (Bilodeau & Renn, 2005). Just as some people experience
their sexual orientation as being fluid or variable (L. M. Diamond,
2013), some people also experience their gender identity as fluid (Lev,
2004).

The experience of questioning one's gender can create significant
confusion for some TGNC people, especially for those who are unfamiliar
with the range of gender identities that exist. To explain any
discordance they may experience between their sex assigned at birth,
related societal expectations, patterns of sexual and romantic
attraction, and/or gender role nonconformity and gender identity, some
TGNC people may assume that they must be gay, lesbian, bisexual, or
queer (Bockting, Benner, & Coleman, 2009). Focusing solely on sexual
orientation as the cause for discordance may obscure awareness of a TGNC
identity. It can be very important to include sexual orientation and
gender identity in the process of identity exploration as well as in the
associated decisions about which options will work best for any
particular person. In addition, many TGNC adults have disguised or
rejected their experience of gender incongruence in childhood or
adolescence to conform to societal expectations and minimize their fear
of difference (Bockting & Coleman, 2007; Byne et al., 2012).

Because gender and patterns of attraction are used to identify a
person's sexual orientation, the articulation of sexual orientation is
made more complex when sex assigned at birth is not aligned with gender
identity. A person's sexual orientation identity cannot be determined by
simply examining external appearance or behavior, but must incorporate a
person's identity and self-identification (Broido, 2000).

***Application.*** Psychologists may assist people in differentiating
gender identity and sexual orientation. As clients become aware of
previously hidden or constrained aspects of their gender identity or
sexuality, psychologists may provide acceptance, support, and
understanding without making assumptions or imposing a specific sexual
orientation or gender identity outcome (APA TFGIGV, 2009). Because of
their roles in assessment, treatment, and prevention, psychologists are
in a unique position to help TGNC people better understand and integrate
the various aspects of their identities. Psychologists may assist TGNC
people by introducing and normalizing differences in gender identity and
expression. As a TGNC person finds a comfortable way to actualize and
express their gender identity, psychologists may notice that previously
incongruent aspects of their sexual orientation may become more salient,
better integrated, or increasingly egosyntonic (Bockting et al., 2009;
H. Devor, 1993; Schleifer, 2006). This process may allow TGNC people the
comfort and opportunity to explore attractions or aspects of their
sexual orientation that previously had been repressed, hidden, or in
conflict with their identity. TGNC people may experience a renewed
exploration of their sexual orientation, a widened spectrum of
attraction, or a shift in how they identify their sexual orientation in
the context of a developing TGNC identity (Coleman, Bockting, & Gooren,
1993; Meier, Pardo, Labuski, & Babcock, 2013; Samons, 2008).

Psychologists may need to provide TGNC people with information about
TGNC identities, offering language to describe the discordance and
confusion TGNC people may be experiencing. To facilitate TGNC people's
learning, psychologists may introduce some of the narratives written by
TGNC people that reflect a range of outcomes and developmental processes
in exploring and affirming gender identity (e.g., Bornstein & Bergman,
2010; Boylan, 2013; J. Green, 2004; Krieger, 2011; Lawrence, 2014).
These resources may potentially aid TGNC people in distinguishing
between issues of sexual orientation and gender identity and in locating
themselves on the gender spectrum. Psychologists may also educate
families and broader community systems (e.g., schools, medical systems)
to better understand how gender identity and sexual orientation are
different but related; this may be particularly useful when working with
youth (Singh & Burnes, 2009; Whitman, 2013). Because gender identity and
sexual orientation are often conflated, even by professionals,
psychologists are encouraged to carefully examine resources that claim
to provide affirmative services for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
and queer (LGBTQ) people, and to confirm which are knowledgeable about
and inclusive of the needs of TGNC people before offering referrals or
recommendations to TGNC people and their families.

***Guideline 3. Psychologists seek to understand how gender identity
intersects with the other cultural identities of TGNC people.***

***Rationale.*** Gender identity and gender expression may have profound
intersections with other aspects of identity (Collins, 2000; Warner,
2008). These aspects may include, but are not limited to,
race/ethnicity, age, education, socioeconomic status, immigration
status, occupation, disability status, HIV status, sexual orientation,
relational status, and religion and/or spiritual affiliation. Whereas
some of these aspects of identity may afford privilege, others may
create stigma and hinder empowerment (Burnes & Chen, 2012; K. M. de
Vries, 2015). In addition, TGNC people who transition may not be
prepared for changes in privilege or societal treatment based on gender
identity and gender expression. To illustrate, an African American trans
man may gain male privilege, but may face racism and societal stigma
particular to African American men. An Asian American/Pacific Islander
trans woman may experience the benefit of being perceived as a cisgender
woman, but may also experience sexism, misogyny, and objectification
particular to Asian American/Pacific Islander cisgender women.

The intersection of multiple identities within TGNC people's lives is
complex and may obstruct or facilitate access to necessary support (A.
Daley, Solomon, Newman, & Mishna, 2008). TGNC people with less privilege
and/or multiple oppressed identities may experience greater stress and
restricted access to resources. They may also develop resilience and
strength in coping with disadvantages, or may locate community-based
resources available to specific groups (e.g., for people living with
HIV; Singh et al., 2011). Gender identity affirmation may conflict with
religious beliefs or traditions (Bockting & Cesaretti, 2001). Finding an
affirmative expression of their religious and spiritual beliefs and
traditions, including positive relationships with religious leaders, can
be an important resource for TGNC people (Glaser, 2008; Porter,
Ronneberg, & Witten, 2013; Xavier, 2000).

***Application.*** In practice, psychologists strive to recognize the
salient multiple and intersecting identities of TGNC people that
influence coping, discrimination, and resilience (Burnes & Chen, 2012).
Improved rapport and therapeutic alliance are likely to develop when
psychologists avoid overemphasizing gender identity and gender
expression when not directly relevant to TGNC people's needs and
concerns. Even when gender identity is the main focus of care,
psychologists are encouraged to understand that a TGNC person's
experience of gender may also be shaped by other important aspects of
identity (e.g., age, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation), and that the
salience of different aspects of identity may evolve as the person
continues psychosocial development across the life span, regardless of
whether they complete a social or medical transition.

At times, a TGNC person's intersection of identities may result in
conflict, such as a person's struggle to integrate gender identity with
religious and/or spiritual upbringing and beliefs (Kidd & Witten, 2008;
Levy & Lo, 2013; Rodriguez & Follins, 2012). Psychologists may aid TGNC
people in understanding and integrating identities that may be
differently privileged within systems of power and systemic inequity
(Burnes & Chen, 2012). Psychologists may also highlight and strengthen
the development of TGNC people's competencies and resilience as they
learn to manage the intersection of stigmatized identities (Singh,
2012).

***Guideline 4. Psychologists are aware of how their attitudes about and
knowledge of gender identity and gender expression may affect the
quality of care they provide to TGNC people and their families.***

***Rationale.*** Psychologists, like other members of society, come to
their personal understanding and acceptance of different aspects of
human diversity through a process of socialization. Psychologists'
cultural biases, as well as the cultural differences between
psychologists and their clients, have a clinical impact (Israel,
Gorcheva, Burnes, & Walther, 2008; Vasquez, 2007). The assumptions,
biases, and attitudes psychologists hold regarding TGNC people and
gender identity and/or gender expression can affect the quality of
services psychologists provide and their ability to develop an effective
therapeutic alliance (Bess & Stabb, 2009; Rachlin, 2002). In addition, a
lack of knowledge or training in providing affirmative care to TGNC
people can limit a psychologist's effectiveness and perpetuate barriers
to care (Bess & Stabb, 2009; Rachlin, 2002). Psychologists experienced
with lesbian, gay, or bisexual (LGB) people may not be familiar with the
unique needs of TGNC people (Israel, 2005; Israel et al., 2008). In
community surveys, TGNC people have reported that many mental health
care providers lack basic knowledge and skills relevant to care of TGNC
people (Bradford, Xavier, Hendricks, Rives, & Honnold, 2007; Xavier,
Bobbin, Singer, & Budd, 2005) and receive little training to prepare
them to work with TGNC people (APA TFGIGV, 2009; Lurie, 2005). The
National Transgender Discrimination Survey (Grant et al., 2011) reported
that 50% of TGNC respondents shared that they had to educate their
health care providers about TGNC care, 28% postponed seeking medical
care due to antitrans bias, and 19% were refused care due to
discrimination.

The APA ethics code (APA, 2010) specifies that psychologists practice in
areas only within the boundaries of their competence (Standard 2.01),
participate in proactive and consistent ways to enhance their competence
(Standard 2.03), and base their work upon established scientific and
professional knowledge (Standard 2.04). Competence in working with TGNC
people can be developed through a range of activities, such as
education, training, supervised experience, consultation, study, or
professional experience. ***Application.*** Psychologists may engage in
practice with TGNC people in various ways; therefore, the depth and
level of knowledge and competence required by a psychologist depends on
the type and complexity of service offered to TGNC people. Services that
psychologists provide to TGNC people require a basic understanding of
the population and its needs, as well as the ability to respectfully
interact in a trans-affirmative manner (L. Carroll, 2010).

APA emphasizes the use of evidence-based practice (APA Presidential Task
Force on Evidence-Based Practice, 2006). Given how easily assumptions or
stereotypes could influence treatment, evidence-based practice may be
especially relevant to psychological practice with TGNC people. Until
evidence-based practices are developed specifically for TGNC people,
psychologists are encouraged to utilize existing evidence-based
practices in the care they provide. APA also promotes collaboration with
clients concerning clinical decisions, including issues related to
costs, potential benefits, and the existing options and resources
related to treatment (APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based
Practice, 2006). TGNC people could benefit from such collaboration and
active engagement in decision making, given the historical
disenfranchisement and disempowerment of TGNC people in health care.

In an effort to develop competence in working with TGNC people,
psychologists are encouraged to examine their personal beliefs regarding
gender and sexuality, gender stereotypes, and TGNC identities, in
addition to identifying gaps in their own knowledge, understanding, and
acceptance (American Counseling Association \[ACA\], 2010). This
examination may include exploring one's own gender identity and gendered
experiences related to privilege, power, or marginalization, as well as
seeking consultation and training with psychologists who have expertise
in working with TGNC people and communities.

Psychologists are further encouraged to develop competence in working
with TGNC people and their families by seeking up-to-date basic
knowledge and understanding of gender identity and expression, and
learning how to interact with TGNC people and their families
respectfully and without judgment. Competence in working with TGNC
people may be achieved and maintained in formal and informal ways,
ranging from exposure in the curriculum of training programs for future
psychologists and continuing education at professional conferences, to
affirmative involvement as allies in the TGNC community. Beyond
acquiring general competence, psychologists who choose to specialize in
working with TGNC people presenting with gender-identity-related
concerns are strongly encouraged to obtain advanced training,
consultation, and professional experience (ACA, 2010; Coleman et al.,
2012).

Psychologists may gain knowledge about the TGNC community and become
more familiar with the complex social issues that affect the lives of
TGNC people through first-hand experiences (e.g., attending community
meetings and conferences, reading narratives written by TGNC people). If
psychologists have not yet developed competence in working with TGNC
people, it is recommended that they refer TGNC people to other
psychologists or providers who are knowledgeable and able to provide
trans-affirmative care.

## Stigma, Discrimination, and Barriers to Care

***Guideline 5. Psychologists recognize how stigma, prejudice,
discrimination, and violence affect the health and well-being of TGNC
people.***

***Rationale.*** Many TGNC people experience discrimination, ranging
from subtle to severe, when accessing housing, health care, employment,
education, public assistance, and other social services (Bazargan &
Galvan, 2012; Bradford, Reisner, Honnold, & Xavier, 2013; Dispenza,
Watson, Chung, & Brack, 2012; Grant et al., 2011). Discrimination can
include assuming a person's assigned sex at birth is fully aligned with
that person's gender identity, not using a person's preferred name or
pronoun, asking TGNC people inappropriate questions about their bodies,
or making the assumption that psychopathology exists given a specific
gender identity or gender expression (Nadal, Rivera, & Corpus, 2010;
Nadal, Skolnik, & Wong, 2012). Discrimination may also include refusing
access to housing or employment or extreme acts of violence (e.g.,
sexual assault, murder). TGNC people who hold multiple marginalized
identities are more vulnerable to discrimination and violence. TGNC
women and people of color disproportionately experience severe forms of
violence and discrimination, including police violence, and are less
likely to receive help from law enforcement (Edelman, 2011; National
Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs, 2011; Saffin, 2011).

TGNC people are at risk of experiencing antitrans prejudice and
discrimination in educational settings. In a national representative
sample of 7,898 LGBT youth in K-12 settings, 55.2% of participants
reported verbal harassment, 22.7% reported physical harassment, and
11.4% reported physical assault based on their gender expression
(Kosciw, Greytak, Palmer, & Boesen, 2014). In a national community
survey of TGNC adults, 15% reported prematurely leaving educational
settings ranging from kindergarten through college as a result of
harassment (Grant et al., 2011). Many schools do not include gender
identity and gender expression in their school nondiscrimination
policies; this leaves TGNC youth without needed protections from
bullying and aggression in schools (Singh & Jackson, 2012). TGNC youth
in rural settings may be even more vulnerable to bullying and hostility
in their school environments due to antitrans prejudice (Kosciw et al.,
2014).

Inequities in educational settings and other forms of TGNC-related
discrimination may contribute to the significant economic disparities
TGNC people have reported. Grant and colleagues (2011) found that TGNC
people were four times more likely to have a household income of less
than \$10,000 compared with cisgender people, and almost half of a
sample of TGNC older adults reported a household income at or below 200%
of poverty (FredriksenGoldsen et al., 2014). TGNC people often face
workplace discrimination both when seeking and maintaining employment
(Brewster, Velez, Mennicke, & Tebbe, 2014; Dispenza et al., 2012; Mizock
& Mueser, 2014). In a nonrepresentative national study of TGNC people,
90% reported having "directly experienced harassment or mistreatment at
work and felt forced to take protective actions that negatively impacted
their careers or their well-being, such as hiding who they were to avoid
workplace repercussions" (Grant et al., 2011, p. 56). In addition, 78%
of respondents reported experiencing some kind of direct mistreatment or
discrimination at work (Grant et al., 2011). Employment discrimination
may be related to stigma based on a TGNC person's appearance,
discrepancies in identity documentation, or being unable to provide job
references linked to that person's pretransition name or gender
presentation (Bender-Baird, 2011).

Issues of employment discrimination and workplace harassment are
particularly salient for TGNC military personnel and veterans.
Currently, TGNC people cannot serve openly in the U.S. military.
Military regulations cite "transsexualism" as a medical exclusion from
service (Department of Defense, 2011; Elders & Steinman, 2014). When
enlisted, TGNC military personnel are faced with very difficult
decisions related to coming out, transition, and seeking appropriate
medical and mental health care, which may significantly impact or end
their military careers. Not surprisingly, research documents very high
rates of suicidal ideation and behavior among TGNC military and veteran
populations (Blosnich et al., 2013; Matarazzo et al., 2014). Being open
about their TGNC identity with health care providers can carry risk for
TGNC military personnel (OutServe-Servicemembers Legal Defense Network,
n.d.). Barriers to accessing health care noted by TGNC veterans include
viewing the VA health care system as an extension of the military,
perceiving the VA as an unwelcoming environment, and fearing providers'
negative reactions to their identity (Sherman, Kauth, Shipherd, &
Street, 2014; Shipherd, Mizock, Maguen, & Green, 2012). A recent study
shows 28% of LGBT veterans perceived their VA as welcoming and one third
as unwelcoming (Sherman et al., 2014). Multiple initiatives are underway
throughout the VA system to improve the quality and sensitivity of
services to LGBT veterans.

Given widespread workplace discrimination and possible dismissal
following transition, TGNC people may engage in sex work or survival sex
(e.g., trading sex for food), or sell drugs to generate income (Grant et
al., 2011; Hwahng & Nuttbrock, 2007; Operario, Soma, & Underhill, 2008;
Stanley, 2011). This increases the potential for negative interactions
with the legal system, such as harassment by the police, bribery,
extortion, and arrest (Edelman, 2011; Testa et al., 2012), as well as
increased likelihood of mental health symptoms and greater health risks,
such as higher incidence of sexually transmitted infections, including
HIV (Nemoto, Operario, Keatley, & Villegas, 2004).

Incarcerated TGNC people report harassment, isolation, forced sex, and
physical assault, both by prison personnel and other inmates (American
Civil Liberties Union National Prison Project, 2005; Brotheim, 2013; C.
Daley, 2005). In sex-segregated facilities, TGNC people may be subjected
to involuntary solitary confinement (also called "administrative
segregation"), which can lead to severe negative mental and physical
health consequences and may block access to services (Gallagher, 2014;
National Center for Transgender Equality, 2012). Another area of concern
is for TGNC immigrants and refugees. TGNC people in detention centers
may not be granted access to necessary care and experience significant
rates of assault and violence in these facilities (Gruberg, 2013). TGNC
people may seek asylum in the United States to escape danger as a direct
result of lack of protections in their country of origin (APA
Presidential Task Force on Immigration, 2012; Cerezo, Morales, Quintero,
& Rothman, 2014; Morales, 2013).

TGNC people have difficulty accessing necessary health care
(Fredriksen-Goldsen et al., 2014; Lambda Legal, 2012) and often feel
unsafe sharing their gender identity or their experiences of antitrans
prejudice and discrimination due to historical and current
discrimination from health care providers (Grant et al., 2011; Lurie,
2005; Singh & McKleroy, 2011). Even when TGNC people have health
insurance, plans may explicitly exclude coverage related to gender
transition (e.g., hormone therapy, surgery). TGNC people may also have
difficulty accessing trans-affirmative primary health care if coverage
for procedures is denied based on gender. For example, trans men may be
excluded from necessary gynecological care based on the assumption that
men do not need these services. These barriers often lead to a lack of
preventive health care for TGNC people (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al., 2014;
Lambda Legal, 2012). Although the landscape is beginning to change with
the recent revision of Medicare policy (National Center for Transgender
Equality, 2014) and changes to state laws (Transgender Law Center,
n.d.), many TGNC people are still likely to have little to no access to
TGNC-related health care as a result of the exclusions in their
insurance.

***Application.*** Awareness of and sensitivity to the effects of
antitrans prejudice and discrimination can assist psychologists in
assessing, treating, and advocating for their TGNC clients. When a TGNC
person faces discrimination based on gender identity or gender
expression, psychologists may facilitate emotional processing of these
experiences and work with the person to identify supportive resources
and possible courses of action. Specific needs of TGNC people might vary
from developing self-advocacy strategies, to navigating public spaces,
to seeking legal recourse for harassment and discrimination in social
services and other systems. Additionally, TGNC people who have been
traumatized by physical or emotional violence may need therapeutic
support.

Psychologists may be able to assist TGNC people in accessing relevant
social service systems. For example, psychologists may be able to assist
in identifying health care providers and housing resources that are
affirming and affordable, or locating affirming religious and spiritual
communities (Glaser, 2008; Porter et al., 2013). Psychologists may also
assist in furnishing documentation or official correspondence that
affirms gender identity for the purpose of accessing appropriate public
accommodations, such as bathroom use or housing (Lev, 2009; W. J. Meyer,
2009).

Additionally, psychologists may identify appropriate resources,
information, and services to help TGNC people in addressing workplace
discrimination, including strategies during a social and/or medical
transition for identity disclosure at work. For those who are seeking
employment, psychologists may help strategize about how and whether to
share information about gender history. Psychologists may also work with
employers to develop supportive policies for workplace gender transition
or to develop training to help employees adjust to the transition of a
coworker.

For TGNC military and veteran populations, psychologists may help to
address the emotional impact of navigating TGNC identity development in
the military system. Psychologists are encouraged to be aware that
issues of confidentiality may be particularly sensitive with active duty
or reserve status service members, as the consequences of being
identified as TGNC may prevent the client's disclosure of gender
identity in treatment.

In educational settings, psychologists may advocate for TGNC youth on a
number of levels (APA & National Association of School Psychologists,
2014; Boulder Valley School District, 2012). Psychologists may consult
with administrators, teachers, and school counselors to provide
resources and trainings on antitrans prejudice and developing safer
school environments for TGNC students (Singh & Burnes, 2009). Peer
support from other TGNC people has been shown to buffer the negative
effect of stigma on mental health (Bockting et al., 2013). As such,
psychologists may consider and develop peer-based interventions to
facilitate greater understanding and respectful treatment of TGNC youth
by cisgender peers (Case & Meier, 2014). Psychologists may work with
TGNC youth and their families to identify relevant resources, such as
school policies that protect gender identity and gender expression (APA
& National Association of School Psychologists, 2014; Gonzalez &
McNulty, 2010), referrals to TGNC-affirmative organizations, and online
resources, which may be especially helpful for TGNC youth in rural
settings.

***Guideline 6. Psychologists strive to recognize the influence of
institutional barriers on the lives of TGNC people and to assist in
developing TGNC-affirmative environments. Rationale.*** Antitrans
prejudice and the adherence of mainstream society to the gender binary
adversely affect TGNC people within their families, schools, health
care, legal systems, workplaces, religious traditions, and communities
(American Civil Liberties Union National Prison Project, 2005; Bradford
et al., 2013; Brewster et al., 2014; Levy & Lo, 2013; McGuire, Anderson,
& Toomey, 2010). TGNC people face challenges accessing gender-inclusive
restrooms, which may result in discomfort when being forced to use a
men's or women's restroom (Transgender Law Center, 2005). In addition to
the emotional distress the forced binary choice that public restrooms
may create for some, TGNC people are frequently concerned with others'
reactions to their presence in public restrooms, including potential
discrimination, harassment, and violence (Herman, 2013).

Many TGNC people may be distrustful of care providers due to previous
experiences of being pathologized (Benson, 2013). Experiences of
discrimination and prejudice with health care providers may be
complicated by power differentials within the therapeutic relationship
that may greatly affect or complicate the care that TGNC people
experience. TGNC people have routinely been asked to obtain an
endorsement letter from a psychologist attesting to the stability of
their gender identity as a prerequisite to access an endocrinologist,
surgeon, or legal institution (e.g., driver's license bureau; Lev,
2009). The need for such required documentation from a psychologist may
influence rapport, resulting in TGNC people fearing prejudicial
treatment in which this documentation is withheld or delayed by the
treating provider (Bouman et al., 2014). Whether a TGNC person has
personally experienced interactions with providers as disempowering or
has learned from community members to expect such a dynamic,
psychologists are encouraged to be prepared for TGNC people to be very
cautious when entering into a therapeutic relationship. When TGNC people
feel validated and empowered within the environment in which a
psychologist practices, the therapeutic relationship will benefit and
the person may be more willing to explore their authentic selves and
share uncertainties and ambiguities that are a common part of TGNC
identity development.

***Application.*** Because many TGNC people experience antitrans
prejudice or discrimination, psychologists are encouraged to ensure that
their work settings are welcoming and respectful of TGNC people, and to
be mindful of what TGNC people may perceive as unwelcoming. To do so,
psychologists may educate themselves about the many ways that cisgender
privilege and antitrans prejudice may be expressed. Psychologists may
also have specific conversations with TGNC people about their
experiences of the mental health system and implement feedback to foster
TGNC-affirmative environments. As a result, when TGNC people access
various treatment settings and public spaces, they may experience less
harm, disempowerment, or pathologization, and thus will be more likely
to avail themselves of resources and support.

Psychologists are encouraged to be proactive in considering how overt or
subtle cues in their workplaces and other environments may affect the
comfort and safety of TGNC people. To increase the comfort of TGNC
people, psychologists are encouraged to display TGNC-affirmative
resources in waiting areas and to avoid the display of items that
reflect antitrans attitudes (Lev, 2009). Psychologists are encouraged to
examine how their language (e.g., use of incorrect pronouns and names)
may reinforce the gender binary in overt or subtle and unintentional
ways (Smith, Shin, & Officer, 2012). It may be helpful for psychologists
to provide training for support staff on how to respectfully interact
with TGNC people. A psychologist may consider making changes to
paperwork, forms, or outreach materials to ensure that these materials
are more inclusive of TGNC people (Spade, 2011b). For example,
demographic questionnaires can communicate respect through the use of
inclusive language and the inclusion of a range of gender identities. In
addition, psychologists may also work within their institutions to
advocate for restrooms that are inclusive and accessible for people of
all gender identities and/or gender expressions.

When working with TGNC people in a variety of care and institutional
settings (e.g., inpatient medical and psychiatric hospitals, substance
abuse treatment settings, nursing homes, foster care, religious
communities, military and VA health care settings, and prisons),
psychologists may become liaisons and advocates for TGNC people's mental
health needs and for respectful treatment that addresses their gender
identity in an affirming manner. In playing this role, psychologists may
find guidance and best practices that have been published for particular
institutional contexts to be helpful (e.g., Department of Veterans
Affairs, Veterans' Health Administration, 2013; Glezer, McNiel, &
Binder, 2013; Merksamer, 2011).

***Guideline 7: Psychologists understand the need to promote social
change that reduces the negative effects of stigma on the health and
well-being of TGNC people.***

***Rationale.*** The lack of public policy that addresses the needs of
TGNC people creates significant hardships for them (Taylor, 2007).
Although there have been major advances in legal protections for TGNC
people in recent years (Buzuvis, 2013; Harvard Law Review Association,
2013), many TGNC people are still not afforded protections from
discrimination on the basis of gender identity or expression (National
LGBTQ Task Force, 2013; Taylor, 2007). For instance, in many states,
TGNC people do not have employment or housing protections and may be
fired or lose their housing based on their gender identity. Many
policies that protect the rights of cisgender people, including LGB
people, do not protect the rights of TGNC people (Currah, & Minter,
2000; Spade, 2011a).

TGNC people can experience challenges obtaining gender-affirming
identity documentation (e.g., birth certificate, passport, social
security card, driver's license). For TGNC people experiencing poverty
or economic hardship, requirements for obtaining this documentation may
be impossible to meet, in part due to the difficulty of securing
employment without identity documentation that aligns with their gender
identity and gender expression (Sheridan, 2009). Additionally, systemic
barriers related to binary gender identification systems prevent some
TGNC people from changing their documents, including those who are
incarcerated, undocumented immigrants, and people who live in
jurisdictions that explicitly forbid such changes (Spade, 2006).
Documentation requirements can also assume a universal TGNC experience
that marginalizes some TGNC people, especially those who do not undergo
a medical transition. This may affect a TGNC person's social and
psychological well-being and interfere with accessing employment,
education, housing and shelter, health care, public benefits, and basic
life management resources (e.g., opening a bank account).

***Application.*** Psychologists are encouraged to inform public policy
to reduce negative systemic impact on TGNC people and to promote
positive social change. Psychologists are encouraged to identify and
improve systems that permit violence; educational, employment, and
housing discrimination; lack of access to health care; unequal access to
other vital resources; and other instances of systemic inequity that
TGNC people experience (ACA, 2010). Many TGNC people experience
stressors from constant barriers, inequitable treatment, and forced
release of sensitive and private information about their bodies and
their lives (Hendricks & Testa, 2012). To obtain proper identity
documentation, TGNC people may be required to provide court orders,
proof of having had surgery, and documentation of psychotherapy or a
psychiatric diagnosis. Psychologists may assist TGNC people by
normalizing their reactions of fatigue and traumatization while
interacting with legal systems and requirements; TGNC people may also
benefit from guidance about alternate avenues of recourse,
self-advocacy, or appeal. When TGNC people feel that it is unsafe to
advocate for themselves, psychologists may work with their clients to
access appropriate resources in the community.

Psychologists are encouraged to be sensitive to the challenges of
attaining gender-affirming identity documentation and how the receipt or
denial of such documentation may affect social and psychological
well-being, the person's ability to obtain education and employment,
find safe housing, access public benefits, obtain student loans, and
access health insurance. It may be of significant assistance for
psychologists to understand and offer information about the process of a
legal name change, gender marker change on identification, or the
process for accessing other genderaffirming documents. Psychologists may
consult the National Center for Transgender Equality, the Sylvia Rivera
Law Project, or the Transgender Law Center for additional information on
identity documentation for TGNC people.

Psychologists may choose to become involved with an organization that
seeks to revise law and public policy to better protect the rights and
dignities of TGNC people. Psychologists may participate at the local,
state, or national level to support TGNC-affirmative health care
accessibility, human rights in sex-segregated facilities, or policy
change regarding gender-affirming identity documentation. Psychologists
working in institutional settings may also expand their roles to work as
collaborative advocates for TGNC people (Gonzalez & McNulty, 2010).
Psychologists are encouraged to provide written affirmations supporting
TGNC people and their gender identity so that they may access necessary
services (e.g., hormone therapy).

## Life Span Development

***Guideline 8. Psychologists working with gender-questioning*** [^4]
***and TGNC youth understand the different developmental needs of
children and adolescents, and that not all youth will persist in a TGNC
identity into adulthood.***

***Rationale.*** Many children develop stability (constancy across time)
in their gender identity between Ages 3 to 4 (Kohlberg, 1966), although
gender consistency (recognition that gender remains the same across
situations) often does not occur until Ages 4 to 7 (Siegal & Robinson,
1987). Children who demonstrate gender nonconformity in preschool and
early elementary years may not follow this trajectory (Zucker & Bradley,
1995). Existing research suggests that between 12% and 50% of children
diagnosed with gender dysphoria may persist in their identification with
a gender different than sex assigned at birth into late adolescence and
young adulthood (Drummond, Bradley, Peterson-Badaali, & Zucker, 2008;
Steensma, McGuire, Kreukels, Beekman, & Cohen-Kettenis, 2013; Wallien &
Cohen-Kettenis, 2008). However, several research studies categorized 30%
to 62% of youth who did not return to the clinic for medical
intervention after initial assessment, and whose gender identity may be
unknown, as "desisters" who no longer identified with a gender different
than sex assigned at birth (Steensma et al., 2013; Wallien &
CohenKettenis, 2008; Zucker, 2008a). As a result, this research runs a
strong risk of inflating estimates of the number of youth who do not
persist with a TGNC identity. Research has suggested that children who
identify more intensely with a gender different than sex assigned at
birth are more likely to persist in this gender identification into
adolescence (Steensma et al., 2013), and that when gender dysphoria
persists through childhood and intensifies into adolescence, the
likelihood of long-term TGNC identification increases (A. L. de Vries,
Steensma, Doreleijers, & CohenKettenis, 2011; Steensma et al., 2013;
Wallien & CohenKettenis, 2008; Zucker, 2008b). Gender-questioning
children who do not persist may be more likely to later identify as gay
or lesbian than non-gender-questioning children (Bailey & Zucker, 1995;
Drescher, 2014; Wallien & Cohen-Kettenis, 2008).

A clear distinction between care of TGNC and genderquestioning children
and adolescents exists in the literature. Due to the evidence that not
all children persist in a TGNC identity into adolescence or adulthood,
and because no approach to working with TGNC children has been
adequately, empirically validated, consensus does not exist regarding
best practice with prepubertal children. Lack of consensus about the
preferred approach to treatment may be due in part to divergent ideas
regarding what constitutes optimal treatment outcomes for TGNC and
gender-questioning youth (Hembree et al., 2009). Two distinct approaches
exist to address gender identity concerns in children (Hill, Menvielle,
Sica, & Johnson, 2010; Wallace & Russell, 2013), with some authors
subdividing one of the approaches to suggest three (Byne et al., 2012;
Drescher, 2014; Stein, 2012).

One approach encourages an affirmation and acceptance of children's
expressed gender identity. This may include assisting children to
socially transition and to begin medical transition when their bodies
have physically developed, or allowing a child's gender identity to
unfold without expectation of a specific outcome (A. L. de Vries &
Cohen-Kettenis, 2012; Edwards-Leeper & Spack, 2012; Ehrensaft, 2012;
Hidalgo et al., 2013; Tishelman et al., 2015). Clinicians using this
approach believe that an open exploration and affirmation will assist
children to develop coping strategies and emotional tools to integrate a
positive TGNC identity should gender questioning persist (Edwards-Leeper
& Spack, 2012).

In the second approach, children are encouraged to embrace their given
bodies and to align with their assigned gender roles. This includes
endorsing and supporting behaviors and attitudes that align with the
child's sex assigned at birth prior to the onset of puberty (Zucker,
2008a; Zucker, Wood, Singh, & Bradley, 2012). Clinicians using this
approach believe that undergoing multiple medical interventions and
living as a TGNC person in a world that stigmatizes gender nonconformity
is a less desirable outcome than one in which children may be assisted
to happily align with their sex assigned at birth (Zucker et al., 2012).
Consensus does not exist regarding whether this approach may provide
benefit (Zucker, 2008a; Zucker et al., 2012) or may cause harm or lead
to psychosocial adversities (Hill et al., 2010; Pyne, 2014; Travers et
al., 2012; Wallace & Russell, 2013). When addressing psychological
interventions for children and adolescents, the World Professional
Association for Transgender Health Standards of Care identify
interventions "aimed at trying to change gender identity and expression
to become more congruent with sex assigned at birth" as unethical
(Coleman et al., 2012, p. 175). It is hoped that future research will
offer improved guidance in this area of practice (Adelson & AACAP CQI,
2012; Malpas, 2011).

Much greater consensus exists regarding practice with adolescents.
Adolescents presenting with gender identity concerns bring their own set
of unique challenges. This may include having a late-onset (i.e.,
postpubertal) presentation of gender nonconforming identification, with
no history of gender role nonconformity or gender questioning in
childhood (Edwards-Leeper & Spack, 2012). Complicating their clinical
presentation, many gender-questioning adolescents also present with
co-occurring psychological concerns, such as suicidal ideation,
self-injurious behaviors (Liu & Mustanski, 2012; Mustanski, Garofalo, &
Emerson, 2010), drug and alcohol use (Garofalo et al., 2006), and autism
spectrum disorders (A. L. de Vries, Noens, CohenKettenis, van
Berckelaer-Onnes, & Doreleijers, 2010; Jones et al., 2012).
Additionally, adolescents can become intensely focused on their
immediate desires, resulting in outward displays of frustration and
resentment when faced with any delay in receiving the medical treatment
from which they feel they would benefit and to which they feel entitled
(Angello, 2013; Edwards-Leeper & Spack, 2012). This intense focus on
immediate needs may create challenges in assuring that adolescents are
cognitively and emotionally able to make life-altering decisions to
change their name or gender marker, begin hormone therapy (which may
affect fertility), or pursue surgery.

Nonetheless, there is greater consensus that treatment approaches for
adolescents affirm an adolescents' gender identity (Coleman et al.,
2012). Treatment options for adolescents extend beyond social approaches
to include medical approaches. One particular medical intervention
involves the use of puberty-suppressing medication or "blockers" (GnRH
analogue), which is a reversible medical intervention used to delay
puberty for appropriately screened adolescents with gender dysphoria
(Coleman et al., 2012; A. L. C. de Vries et al., 2014; Edwards-Leeper, &
Spack, 2012). Because of their age, other medical interventions may also
become available to adolescents, and psychologists are frequently
consulted to provide an assessment of whether such procedures would be
advisable (Coleman et al., 2012).

***Application.*** Psychologists working with TGNC and
gender-questioning youth are encouraged to regularly review the most
current literature in this area, recognizing the limited available
research regarding the potential benefits and risks of different
treatment approaches for children and for adolescents. Psychologists are
encouraged to offer parents and guardians clear information about
available treatment approaches, regardless of the specific approach
chosen by the psychologist. Psychologists are encouraged to provide
psychological service to TGNC and gender-questioning children and
adolescents that draws from empirically validated literature when
available, recognizing the influence psychologists' values and beliefs
may have on the treatment approaches they select (Ehrbar & Gorton,
2010). Psychologists are also encouraged to remain aware that what one
youth and/or parent may be seeking in a therapeutic relationship may not
coincide with a clinician's approach (Brill & Pepper, 2008). In cases in
which a youth and/or parent identify different preferred treatment
outcomes than a clinician, it may not be clinically appropriate for the
clinician to continue working with the youth and family, and alternative
options, including referral, might be considered. Psychologists may also
find themselves navigating family systems in which youth and their
caregivers are seeking different treatment outcomes (Edwards-Leeper &
Spack, 2012). Psychologists are encouraged to carefully reflect on their
personal values and beliefs about gender identity development in
conjunction with the available research, and to keep the best interest
of the child or adolescent at the forefront of their clinical decisions
at all times.

Because gender nonconformity may be transient for younger children in
particular, the psychologist's role may be to help support children and
their families through the process of exploration and
self-identification (Ehrensaft, 2012). Additionally, psychologists may
provide parents with information about possible long-term trajectories
children may take in regard to their gender identity, along with the
available medical interventions for adolescents whose TGNC
identification persists (Edwards-Leeper & Spack, 2012).

When working with adolescents, psychologists are encouraged to recognize
that some TGNC adolescents will not have a strong history of childhood
gender role nonconformity or gender dysphoria either by self-report or
family observation (Edwards-Leeper & Spack, 2012). Some of these
adolescents may have withheld their feelings of gender nonconformity out
of a fear of rejection, confusion, conflating gender identity and sexual
orientation, or a lack of awareness of the option to identify as TGNC.
Parents of these adolescents may need additional assistance in
understanding and supporting their youth, given that late-onset gender
dysphoria and TGNC identification may come as a significant surprise.
Moving more slowly and cautiously in these cases is often advisable
(Edwards-Leeper & Spack, 2012). Given the possibility of adolescents'
intense focus on immediate desires and strong reactions to perceived
delays or barriers, psychologists are encouraged to validate these
concerns and the desire to move through the process quickly while also
remaining thoughtful and deliberate in treatment. Adolescents and their
families may need support in tolerating ambiguity and uncertainty with
regard to gender identity and its development (Brill & Pepper, 2008). It
is encouraged that care should be taken not to foreclose this process.

For adolescents who exhibit a long history of gender nonconformity,
psychologists may inform parents that the adolescent's self-affirmed
gender identity is most likely stable (A. L. de Vries et al., 2011). The
clinical needs of these adolescents may be different than those who are
in the initial phases of exploring or questioning their gender identity.
Psychologists are encouraged to complete a comprehensive evaluation and
ensure the adolescent's and family's readiness to progress while also
avoiding unnecessary delay for those who are ready to move forward.

Psychologists working with TGNC and gender-questioning youth are
encouraged to become familiar with medical treatment options for
adolescents (e.g., pubertysuppressing medication, hormone therapy) and
work collaboratively with medical providers to provide appropriate care
to clients. Because the ongoing involvement of a knowledgeable mental
health provider is encouraged due to the psychosocial implications, and
is often also a required part of the medical treatment regimen that may
be offered to TGNC adolescents (Coleman et al., 2012; Hembree et al.,
2009), psychologists often play an essential role in assisting in this
process.

Psychologists may encourage parents and caregivers to involve youth in
developmentally appropriate decision making about their education,
health care, and peer networks, as these relate to children's and
adolescents' gender identity and gender expression (Ryan, Russell,
Huebner, Diaz, & Sanchez, 2010). Psychologists are also encouraged to
educate themselves about the advantages and disadvantages of social
transition during childhood and adolescence, and to discuss these
factors with both their young clients and clients' parents. Emphasizing
to parents the importance of allowing their child the freedom to return
to a gender identity that aligns with sex assigned at birth or another
gender identity at any point cannot be overstated, particularly given
the research that suggests that not all young gender nonconforming
children will ultimately express a gender identity different from that
assigned at birth (Wallien, & Cohen-Kettenis, 2008; Zucker & Bradley,
1995). Psychologists are encouraged to acknowledge and explore the fear
and burden of responsibility that parents and caregivers may feel as
they make decisions about the health of their child or adolescent
(Grossman, D'Augelli, Howell, & Hubbard, 2006). Parents and caregivers
may benefit from a supportive environment to discuss feelings of
isolation, explore loss and grief they may experience, vent anger and
frustration at systems that disrespect or discriminate against them and
their youth, and learn how to communicate with others about their
child's or adolescent's gender identity or gender expression (Brill &
Pepper, 2008).

***Guideline 9. Psychologists strive to understand both the particular
challenges that TGNC elders experience and the resilience they can
develop.***

***Rationale.*** Little research has been conducted about TGNC elders,
leaving much to be discovered about this life stage for TGNC people
(Auldridge, Tamar-Mattis, Kennedy, Ames, & Tobin, 2012). Socialization
into gender role behaviors and expectations based on sex assigned at
birth, as well as the extent to which TGNC people adhere to these
societal standards, is influenced by the chronological age at which a
person self-identifies as TGNC, the age at which a person comes out or
socially and/or medically transitions (Birren & Schaie, 2006; Bockting &
Coleman, 2007; Cavanaugh & Blanchard-Fields, 2010; Nuttbrock et al.,
2010; Wahl, Iwarsson, & Oswald, 2012), and a person's generational
cohort (e.g., 1950 vs. 2010; Fredriksen-Goldsen et al., 2011).

Even decades after a medical or social transition, TGNC elders may still
subscribe to the predominant gender role expectations that existed at
the time of their transition (Knochel, Croghan, Moore, & Quam, 2011).
Prior to the 1980s, TGNC people who transitioned were strongly
encouraged by providers to pass in society as cisgender and heterosexual
and to avoid associating with other TGNC people (Benjamin, 1966; R.
Green & Money, 1969; Hastings, 1974; Hastings & Markland, 1978). Even
TGNC elders who were comfortable telling others about their TGNC
identity when they were younger may choose not to reveal their identity
at a later stage of life (Ekins & King, 2005; Ippolito & Witten, 2014).
Elders' unwillingness to disclose their TGNC identity can result from
feelings of physical vulnerability or increased reliance on others who
may discriminate against them or treat them poorly as a result of their
gender identity (Bockting & Coleman, 2007), especially if the elder
resides in an institutionalized setting (i.e., nursing home, assisted
living facility) and relies on others for many daily needs (Auldridge et
al., 2012). TGNC elders are also at a heightened risk for depression,
suicidal ideation, and loneliness compared with LGB elders (Auldridge et
al., 2012; Fredriksen-Goldsen et al., 2011).

A Transgender Law Center survey found that TGNC and LGB elders had less
financial well-being than their younger cohorts, despite having a higher
than average educational level for their age group compared with the
general population (Hartzell, Frazer, Wertz, & Davis, 2009). Survey
research has also revealed that TGNC elders experience underemployment
and gaps in employment, often due to discrimination (Auldridge et al.,
2012; Beemyn & Rankin, 2011; Factor & Rothblum, 2007). In the past, some
TGNC people with established careers may have been encouraged by service
providers to find new careers or jobs to avoid undergoing a gender
transition at work or being identified as TGNC, potentially leading to a
significant loss of income and occupational identity (CookDaniels,
2006). Obstacles to employment can increase economic disparities that
result in increased needs for supportive housing and other social
services (National Center for Transgender Equality, 2012; Services and
Advocacy for GLBT Elders & National Center for Transgender Equality,
2012).

TGNC elders may face obstacles to seeking or accessing resources that
support their physical, financial, or emotional well-being. For
instance, they may be concerned about applying for social security
benefits, fearing that their TGNC identity may become known (Hartzell et
al., 2009). A TGNC elder may avoid medical care, increasing the
likelihood of later needing a higher level of medical care (e.g.,
home-based care, assisted living, or nursing home) than their same-age
cisgender peers (Hartzell et al., 2009; Ippolito & Witten, 2014;
Mikalson et al., 2012). Nursing homes and assisted living facilities are
rarely sensitive to the unique medical needs of TGNC elders (National
Senior Citizens Law Center, 2011). Some TGNC individuals who enter
congregate housing, assisted living, or long-term care settings may feel
the need to reverse their transition to align with sex assigned at birth
to avoid discrimination and persecution by other residents and staff
(Ippolito & Witten, 2014).

Older age may both facilitate and complicate medical treatment related
to gender transition. TGNC people who begin hormone therapy later in
life may have a smoother transition due to waning hormone levels that
are a natural part of aging (Witten & Eyler, 2012). Age may also
influence the decisions TGNC elders make regarding sex-affirmation
surgeries, especially if physical conditions exist that could
significantly increase risks associated with surgery or recovery.

Much has been written about the resilience of elders who have endured
trauma (Fuhrmann & Shevlowitz, 2006; Hardy, Concato, & Gill, 2004;
Mlinac, Sheeran, Blissmer, Lees, & Martins, 2011; Rodin & Stewart,
2012). Although some TGNC elders have experienced significant
psychological trauma related to their gender identity, some also have
developed resilience and effective ways of coping with adversity
(Fruhauf & Orel, 2015). Despite the limited availability of
LGBTQ-affirmative religious organizations in many local communities,
TGNC elders make greater use of these resources than their cisgender
peers (Porter et al., 2013).

***Application.*** Psychologists are encouraged to seek information
about the biopsychosocial needs of TGNC elders to inform case
conceptualization and treatment planning to address psychological,
social, and medical concerns. Many TGNC elders are socially isolated.
Isolation can occur as a result of a loss of social networks through
death or through disclosure of a TGNC identity. Psychologists may assist
TGNC elders in establishing new social networks that support and value
their TGNC identity, while also working to strengthen existing family
and friend networks after a TGNC identity has been disclosed. TGNC
elders may find special value in relationships with others in their
generational cohort or those who may have similar coming-out
experiences. Psychologists may encourage TGNC elders to identify ways
they can mentor and improve the resilience of younger TGNC generations,
creating a sense of generativity (Erikson, 1968) and contribution while
building new supportive relationships. Psychologists working with TGNC
elders may help them recognize the sources of their resilience and
encourage them to connect with and be active in their communities
(Fuhrmann & Craffey, 2014).

For TGNC elders who have chosen not to disclose their gender identity,
psychologists may provide support to address shame, guilt, or
internalized antitrans prejudice, and validate each person's freedom to
choose their pattern of disclosure. Clinicians may also provide
validation and empathy when TGNC elders have chosen a model of
transition that avoids any disclosure of gender identity and is heavily
focused on passing as cisgender.

TGNC elders who choose to undergo a medical or social transition in
older adulthood may experience antitrans prejudice from people who
question the value of transition at an older age or who believe that
these elders are not truly invested in their transition or in a TGNC
identity given the length of time they have waited (Auldridge et al.,
2012). Some TGNC elders may also grieve lost time and missed
opportunities. Psychologists may validate elders' choices to come out,
transition, or evolve their gender identity or gender expression at any
age, recognizing that such choices may have been much less accessible or
viable at earlier stages of TGNC elders' lives.

Psychologists may assist congregate housing, assisted living, or
long-term care settings to best meet TGNC elders' needs through
respectful communication and affirmation of each person's gender
identity and gender expression. Psychologists may work with TGNC people
in hospice care systems to develop an end-of-life plan that respects the
person's wishes about disclosure of gender identity during and after
death.

## Assessment, Therapy, and Intervention

***Guideline 10. Psychologists strive to understand how mental health
concerns may or may not be related to a TGNC person's gender identity
and the psychological effects of minority stress.***

***Rationale.*** TGNC people may seek assistance from psychologists in
addressing gender-related concerns, other mental health issues, or both.
Mental health problems experienced by a TGNC person may or may not be
related to that person's gender identity and/or may complicate
assessment and intervention of gender-related concerns. In some cases,
there may not be a relationship between a person's gender identity and a
co-occurring condition (e.g., depression, PTSD, substance abuse). In
other cases, having a TGNC identity may lead or contribute to a
co-occurring mental health condition, either directly by way of gender
dysphoria, or indirectly by way of minority stress and oppression
(Hendricks & Testa, 2012; I. H. Meyer, 1995, 2003). In extremely rare
cases, a co-occurring condition can mimic gender dysphoria (i.e., a
psychotic process that distorts the perception of one's gender; Baltieri
& De Andrade, 2009; Hepp, Kraemer, Schnyder, Miller, & Delsignore,
2004).

Regardless of the presence or absence of an etiological link, gender
identity may affect how a TGNC person experiences a co-occurring mental
health condition, and/or a co-occurring mental health condition may
complicate the person's gender expression or gender identity. For
example, an eating disorder may be influenced by a TGNC person's gender
expression (e.g., rigid eating patterns used to manage body shape or
menstruation may be related to gender identity or gender dysphoria;
Ålgars, Alanko, Santtila, & Sandnabba, 2012; Murray, Boon, & Touyz,
2013). In addition, the presence of autism spectrum disorder may
complicate a TGNC person's articulation and exploration of gender
identity (Jones et al., 2012). In cases in which gender dysphoria is
contributing to other mental health concerns, treatment of gender
dysphoria may be helpful in alleviating those concerns as well
(Keo-Meier et al., 2015).

A relationship also exists between mental health conditions and the
psychological sequelae of minority stress that TGNC people can
experience. Given that TGNC people experience physical and sexual
violence (ClementsNolle et al., 2006; Kenagy & Bostwick, 2005; Lombardi,
Wilchins, Priesing, & Malouf, 2001; Xavier et al., 2005), general
harassment and discrimination (Beemyn & Rankin, 2011; Factor & Rothblum,
2007), and employment and housing discrimination (Bradford et al.,
2007), they are likely to experience significant levels of minority
stress. Studies have demonstrated the disproportionately high levels of
negative psychological sequelae related to minority stress, including
suicidal ideation and suicide attempts (Center for Substance Abuse
Treatment, 2012; ClementsNolle et al., 2006; Cochran & Cauce, 2006;
Nuttbrock et al., 2010; Xavier et al., 2005) and completed suicides
(Dhejne et al., 2011; van Kesteren, Asscheman, Megens, & Gooren, 1997).
Recent studies have begun to demonstrate an association between sources
of external stress and psychological distress (Bockting et al., 2013;
Nuttbrock et al., 2010), including suicidal ideation and attempts and
selfinjurious behavior (dickey, Reisner, & Juntunen, 2015; Goldblum et
al., 2012; Testa et al., 2012).

The minority stress model accounts for both the negative mental health
effects of stigma-related stress and the processes by which members of
the minority group may develop resilience and resistance to the negative
effects of stress (I. H. Meyer, 1995, 2003). Although the minority
stress model was developed as a theory of the relationship between
sexual orientation and mental disorders, the model has been adapted to
TGNC populations (Hendricks &

Testa, 2012).

***Application.*** Because of the increased risk of stress-related
mental health conditions, psychologists are encouraged to conduct a
careful diagnostic assessment, including a differential diagnosis, when
working with TGNC people (Coleman et al., 2012). Taking into account the
intricate interplay between the effects of mental health symptoms and
gender identity and gender expression, psychologists are encouraged to
neither ignore mental health problems a TGNC person is experiencing, nor
erroneously assume that those mental health problems are a result of the
person's gender identity or gender expression. Psychologists are
strongly encouraged to be cautious before determining that gender
nonconformity or dysphoria is due to an underlying psychotic process, as
this type of causal relationship is rare.

When TGNC people seek to access transition-related health care, a
psychosocial assessment is often part of this process (Coleman et al.,
2012). A comprehensive and balanced assessment typically includes not
only information about a person's past experiences of antitrans
prejudice or discrimination, internalized messages related to these
experiences, and anticipation of future victimization or rejection
(Coolhart, Provancher, Hager, & Wang, 2008), but also coping strategies
and sources of resilience (Hendricks & Testa, 2012; Singh et al., 2011).
Gathering information about negative life events directly related to a
TGNC person's gender identity and gender expression may assist
psychologists in understanding the sequelae of stress and
discrimination, distinguishing them from concurrent and potentially
unrelated mental health problems. Similarly, when a TGNC person has a
primary presenting concern that is not gender focused, a comprehensive
assessment takes into account that person's experience relative to
gender identity and gender expression, including any discrimination,
just as it would include assessing other potential trauma history,
medical concerns, previous experience with helping professionals,
important future goals, and important aspects of identity. Strategies a
TGNC person uses to navigate antitrans discrimination could be sources
of strength to deal with life challenges or sources of distress that
increase challenges and barriers.

Psychologists are encouraged to help TGNC people understand the
pervasive influence of minority stress and discrimination that may exist
in their lives, potentially including internalized negative attitudes
about themselves and their TGNC identity (Hendricks & Testa, 2012). With
this support, clients can better understand the origins of their mental
health symptoms and normalize their reactions when faced with
TGNC-related inequities and discrimination. Minority stress models also
identify potentially important sources of resilience. TGNC people can
develop resilience when they connect with other TGNC people who provide
information on how to navigate antitrans prejudice and increase access
to necessary care and resources (Singh et al., 2011). TGNC people may
need help developing social support systems to nurture their resilience
and bolster their ability to cope with the adverse effects of antitrans
prejudice and/or discrimination (Singh & McKleroy, 2011).

Feminizing or masculinizing hormone therapy can positively or negatively
affect existing mood disorders (Coleman et al., 2012). Psychologists may
also help TGNC people who are in the initial stages of hormone therapy
adjust to normal changes in how they experience emotions. For example,
trans women who begin estrogens and antiandrogens may experience a
broader range of emotions than they are accustomed to, or trans men
beginning testosterone might be faced with adjusting to a higher libido
and feeling more emotionally reactive in stressful situations. These
changes can be normalized as similar to the emotional adjustments that
cisgender women and men experience during puberty. Some TGNC people will
be able to adapt existing coping strategies, whereas others may need
help developing additional skills (e.g., emotional regulation or
assertiveness). Readers are encouraged to refer to the World
Professional Association for Transgender Health Standards of Care for
discussion of the possible effects of hormone therapy on a TGNC person's
mood, affect, and behavior (Coleman et al., 2012).

***Guideline 11. Psychologists recognize that TGNC people are more
likely to experience positive life outcomes when they receive social
support or trans-affirmative care.***

***Rationale.*** Research has primarily shown positive treatment
outcomes when TGNC adults and adolescents receive TGNC-affirmative
medical and psychological services (i.e., psychotherapy, hormones,
surgery; Byne et al., 2012; R. Carroll, 1999; Cohen-Kettenis,
Delemarre-van de Waal, & Gooren, 2008; Davis & Meier, 2014; De Cuypere
et al., 2006; Gooren, Giltay, & Bunck, 2008; Kuhn et al., 2009),
although sample sizes are frequently small with no population-based
studies. In a meta-analysis of the hormone therapy treatment literature
with TGNC adults and adolescents, researchers reported that 80% of
participants receiving trans-affirmative care experienced an improved
quality of life, decreased gender dysphoria, and a reduction in negative
psychological symptoms (Murad et al., 2010).

In addition, TGNC people who receive social support about their gender
identity and gender expression have improved outcomes and quality of
life (Brill & Pepper, 2008; Pinto, Melendez, & Spector, 2008). Several
studies indicate that family acceptance of TGNC adolescents and adults
is associated with decreased rates of negative outcomes, such as
depression, suicide, and HIV risk behaviors and infection (Bockting et
al., 2013; Dhejne et al., 2011; Grant et al., 2011; Liu & Mustanski,
2012; Ryan, 2009). Family support is also a strong protective factor for
TGNC adults and adolescents (Bockting et al., 2013; Moody & Smith, 2013;
Ryan et al., 2010). TGNC people, however, frequently experience blatant
or subtle antitrans prejudice, discrimination, and even violence within
their families (Bradford et al., 2007). Such family rejection is
associated with higher rates of HIV infection, suicide, incarceration,
and homelessness for TGNC adults and adolescents (Grant et al., 2011;
Liu & Mustanski, 2012). Family rejection and lower levels of social
support are significantly correlated with depression (Clements-Nolle et
al., 2006; Ryan, 2009). Many TGNC people seek support through peer
relationships, chosen families, and communities in which they may be
more likely to experience acceptance (Gonzalez & McNulty, 2010;
Nuttbrock et al., 2009). Peer support from other TGNC people has been
found to be a moderator between antitrans discrimination and mental
health, with higher levels of peer support associated with better mental
health (Bockting et al., 2013). For some TGNC people, support from
religious and spiritual communities provides an important source of
resilience (Glaser, 2008; Kidd & Witten, 2008; Porter et al., 2013).

***Application.*** Given the strong evidence for the positive influence
of affirmative care, psychologists are encouraged to facilitate access
to and provide trans-affirmative care to TGNC people. Whether through
the provision of assessment and psychotherapy, or through assisting
clients to access hormone therapy or surgery, psychologists may play a
critical role in empowering and validating TGNC adults' and adolescents'
experiences and increasing TGNC people's positive life outcomes (Bess &
Stabb, 2009; Rachlin, 2002).

Psychologists are also encouraged to be aware of the importance of
affirmative social support and assist TGNC adults and adolescents in
building social support networks in which their gender identity is
accepted and affirmed. Psychologists may assist TGNC people in
negotiating family dynamics that may arise in the course of exploring
and establishing gender identity. Depending on the context of
psychological practice, these issues might be addressed in individual
work with TGNC clients, conjoint sessions including members of their
support system, family therapy, or group therapy. Psychologists may help
TGNC people decide how and when to reveal their gender identity at work
or school, in religious communities, and to friends and contacts in
other settings. TGNC people who decide not to come out in all aspects of
their lives can still benefit from TGNC-affirmative in-person or online
peer support groups.

Clients may ask psychologists to assist family members in exploring
feelings about their loved one's gender identity and gender expression.
Published models of family adjustment (Emerson & Rosenfeld, 1996) may be
useful to help normalize family members' reactions upon learning that
they have a TGNC family member, and to reduce feelings of isolation.
When working with family members or significant others, it may be
helpful to normalize feelings of loss or fear of what may happen to
current relationships as TGNC people disclose their gender identity and
expression to others. Psychologists may help significant others adjust
to changing relationships and consider how to talk to extended family,
friends, and other community members about TGNC loved ones. Providing
significant others with referrals to TGNC-affirmative providers,
educational resources, and support groups can have a profound impact on
their understanding of gender identity and their communication with TGNC
loved ones. Psychologists working with couples and families may also
help TGNC people identify ways to include significant others in their
social or medical transition.

Psychologists working with TGNC people in rural settings may provide
clients with resources to connect with other TGNC people online or
provide information about in-person support groups in which they can
explore the unique challenges of being TGNC in these geographic areas
(Walinsky & Whitcomb, 2010). Psychologists serving TGNC military and
veteran populations are encouraged to be sensitive to the barriers these
individuals face, especially for people who are on active duty in the
U.S. military (OutServe-Servicemembers Legal Defense Network, n.d.).
Psychologists may help TGNC military members and veterans establish
specific systems of support that create a safe and affirming space to
reduce isolation and to create a network of peers with a shared military
experience. Psychologists who work with veterans are encouraged to
educate themselves on recent changes to VA policy that support equal
access to VA medical and mental health services (Department of Veterans
Affairs, Veterans' Health Administration, 2013).

***Guideline 12. Psychologists strive to understand the effects that
changes in gender identity and gender expression have on the romantic
and sexual relationships of TGNC people.***

***Rationale.*** Relationships involving TGNC people can be healthy and
successful (Kins, Hoebeke, Heylens, Rubens, & De Cuyprere, 2008; Meier,
Sharp, Michonski, Babcock, & Fitzgerald, 2013) as well as challenging
(Brown, 2007; Iantaffi & Bockting, 2011). A study of successful
relationships between TGNC men and cisgender women found that these
couples attributed the success of their relationship to respect,
honesty, trust, love, understanding, and open communication (Kins et
al., 2008). Just as relationships between cisgender people can involve
abuse, so can relationships between TGNC people and their partners
(Brown, 2007), with some violent partners threatening to disclose a TGNC
person's identity to exact control in the relationship (FORGE, n.d.).

In the early decades of medical and social transition for TGNC people,
only those whose sexual orientations would be heterosexual
posttransition (e.g., trans woman with a cisgender man) were deemed
eligible for medical and social transition (Meyerowitz, 2002). This
restriction prescribed only certain relationship partners (American
Psychiatric Association, 1980; Benjamin, 1966; Chivers & Bailey, 2000),
denied access to surgery for trans men identifying as gay or bisexual
(Coleman & Bockting, 1988), or trans women identifying as lesbian or
bisexual, and even required that TGNC people's existing legal marriages
be dissolved before they could gain access to transition care (Lev,
2004).

Disclosure of a TGNC identity can have an important impact on the
relationship between TGNC people and their partners. Disclosure of TGNC
status earlier in the relationship tends to be associated with better
relationship outcomes, whereas disclosure of TGNC status many years into
an existing relationship may be perceived as a betrayal (Erhardt, 2007).
When a TGNC person comes out in the context of an existing relationship,
it can also be helpful if both partners are involved in decision making
about the use of shared resources (i.e., how to balance the financial
costs of transition with other family needs) and how to share this news
with shared supports (i.e., friends and family). Sometimes relationship
roles are renegotiated in the context of a TGNC person coming out to
their partner (Samons, 2008). Assumptions about what it means to be a
"husband" or a "wife" can shift if the gender identity of one's spouse
shifts (Erhardt, 2007). Depending on when gender issues are disclosed
and how much of a change this creates in the relationship, partners may
grieve the loss of aspects of their partner and the way the relationship
used to be (Lev, 2004).

Although increasing alignment between gender identity and gender
expression, whether it be through dress, behavior, or through medical
interventions (i.e., hormones, surgery), does not necessarily affect to
whom a TGNC person is attracted (Coleman et al., 1993), TGNC people may
become more open to exploring their sexual orientation, may redefine
sexual orientation as they move through transition, or both (Daskalos,
1998; H. Devor, 1993; Schleifer, 2006). Through increased comfort with
their body and gender identity, TGNC people may explore aspects of their
sexual orientation that were previously hidden or that felt discordant
with their sex assigned at birth. Following a medical and/or social
transition, a TGNC person's sexual orientation may remain constant or
shift, either temporarily or permanently (e.g., renewed exploration of
sexual orientation in the context of TGNC identity, shift in attraction
or choice of sexual partners, widened spectrum of attraction, shift in
sexual orientation identity; Meier, Sharp et al., 2013; Samons, 2008).
For example, a trans man previously identified as a lesbian may later be
attracted to men (Coleman et al., 1993; dickey, Burnes, & Singh, 2012),
and a trans woman attracted to women pretransition may remain attracted
to women posttransition (Lev, 2004).

Some TGNC people and their partners may fear the loss of mutual sexual
attraction and other potential effects of shifting gender identities in
the relationship. Lesbianidentified partners of trans men may struggle
with the idea that being in a relationship with a man may cause others
to perceive them as a heterosexual couple (Califia, 1997). Similarly,
women in heterosexual relationships who later learn that their partners
are trans women may be unfamiliar with navigating stigma associated with
sexual minority status when viewed as a lesbian couple (Erhardt, 2007).
Additionally, partners may find they are not attracted to a partner
after transition. As an example, a lesbian whose partner transitions to
a male identity may find that she is no longer attracted to this person
because she is not sexually attracted to men. Partners of TGNC people
may also experience grief and loss as their partners engage in social
and/or medical transitions.

***Application.*** Psychologists may help foster resilience in
relationships by addressing issues specific to partners of TGNC people.
Psychologists may provide support to partners of TGNC people who are
having difficulty with their partner's evolving gender identity or
transition, or are experiencing others having difficulty with the
partner's transition. Partner peer support groups may be especially
helpful in navigating internalized antitrans prejudice, shame,
resentment, and relationship concerns related to a partner's gender
transition. Meeting or knowing other TGNC people, other partners of TGNC
people, and couples who have successfully navigated transition may also
help TGNC people and their partners and serve as a protective factor
(Brown, 2007). When TGNC status is disclosed during an existing
relationship, psychologists may help couples explore which relationship
dynamics they want to preserve and which they might like to change.

In working with psychologists, TGNC people may explore a range of issues
in their relationships and sexuality (dickey et al., 2012), including
when and how to come out to current or potential romantic and sexual
partners, communicating their sexual desires, renegotiating intimacy
that may be lost during the TGNC partner's transition, adapting to
bodily changes caused by hormone use or surgery, and exploring
boundaries regarding touch, affection, and safer sex practices (Iantaffi
& Bockting, 2011; Sevelius, 2009). TGNC people may experience increased
sexual self-efficacy through transition. Although psychologists may aid
partners in understanding a TGNC person's transition decisions, TGNC
people may also benefit from help in cultivating awareness of the ways
in which these decisions influence the lives of loved ones.

***Guideline 13. Psychologists seek to understand how parenting and
family formation among TGNC people take a variety of forms.***

***Rationale.*** Psychologists work with TGNC people across the life
span to address parenting and family issues (Kenagy & Hsieh, 2005).
There is evidence that many TGNC people have and want children (Wierckx
et al., 2012). Some TGNC people conceive a child through sexual
intercourse, whereas others may foster, adopt, pursue surrogacy, or
employ assisted reproductive technologies, such as sperm or egg
donation, to build or expand a family (De Sutter, Kira, Verschoor, &
Hotimsky, 2002). Based on a small body of research to date, there is no
indication that children of TGNC parents suffer long-term negative
impacts directly related to parental gender change (R. Green, 1978,
1988; White & Ettner, 2004). TGNC people may find it both challenging to
find medical providers who are willing to offer them reproductive
treatment and to afford the cost (Coleman et al., 2012). Similarly,
adoption can be quite costly, and some TGNC people may find it
challenging to find foster care or adoption agencies that will work with
them in a nondiscriminatory manner. Current or past use of hormone
therapy may limit fertility and restrict a TGNC person's reproductive
options (Darnery, 2008; Wierckx et al., 2012). Other TGNC people may
have children or families before coming out as TGNC or beginning a
gender transition.

TGNC people may present with a range of parenting and family-building
concerns. Some will seek support to address issues within preexisting
family systems, some will explore the creation or expansion of a family,
and some will need to make decisions regarding potential fertility
issues related to hormone therapy, pubertal suppression, or surgical
transition. The medical and/or social transition of a TGNC parent may
shift family dynamics, creating challenges and opportunities for
partners, children, and other family members. One study of therapists'
reflections on their experiences with TGNC clients suggested that family
constellation and the parental relationship was more significant for
children than the parent's social and/or medical transition itself
(White & Ettner, 2004). Although research has not documented that the
transitions of TGNC people have an effect on their parenting abilities,
preexisting partnerships or marriages may not survive the disclosure of
a TGNC identity or a subsequent transition (dickey et al., 2012). This
may result in divorce or separation, which may affect the children in
the family. A positive relationship between parents, regardless of
marital status, has been suggested to be an important protective factor
for children (Amato, 2001; White & Ettner, 2007). This seems to be the
case especially when children are reminded of the parent's love and
assured of the parent's continued presence in their life (White &
Ettner, 2007). Based on a small body of literature available, it is
generally the case that younger children are best able to incorporate
the transition of a parent, followed by adult children, with adolescents
generally having the most difficulty (White & Ettner, 2007). If
separated or divorced from their partners or spouses, TGNC parents may
be at risk for loss of custody or visitation rights because some courts
presume that there is a nexus between their gender identity or gender
expression and parental fitness (Flynn, 2006). This type of prejudice is
especially common for TGNC people of color (Grant et al., 2011).

***Application.*** Psychologists are encouraged to attend to the
parenting and family-building concerns of TGNC people. When working with
TGNC people who have previous parenting experience, psychologists may
help TGNC people identify how being a parent may influence decisions to
come out as TGNC or to begin a transition (Freeman, Tasker, & Di Ceglie,
2002; Grant et al., 2011; Wierckx et al., 2012). Some TGNC people may
choose to delay disclosure until their children have grown and left home
(Bethea & McCollum, 2013). Clinical guidelines jointly developed by a
Vancouver, British Columbia, TGNC community organization and a health
care provider organization encourage psychologists and other mental
health providers working with TGNC people to plan for disclosure to a
partner, previous partner, or children, and to pay particular attention
to resources that assist TGNC people to discuss their identity with
children of various ages in developmentally appropriate ways (Bockting
et al., 2006). Lev (2004) uses a developmental stage framework for the
process that family members are likely to go through in coming to terms
with a TGNC family member's identity that some psychologists may find
helpful. Awareness of peer support networks for spouses and children of
TGNC people can also be helpful (e.g., PFLAG, TransYouth Family Allies).
Psychologists may provide family counseling to assist a family in
managing disclosure, improve family functioning, and maintain family
involvement of the TGNC person, as well as aiding the TGNC person in
attending to the ways that their transition process has affected their
family members (Samons, 2008). Helping parents to continue to work
together to focus on the needs of their children and to maintain family
bonds is likely to lead to the best results for the children (White &
Ettner, 2007).

For TGNC people with existing families, psychologists may support TGNC
people in seeking legal counsel regarding parental rights in adoption or
custody. Depending on the situation, this may be desirable even if the
TGNC parent is biologically related to the child (Minter & Wald, 2012).
Although being TGNC is not a legal impediment to adoption in the United
States, there is the potential for overt and covert discrimination and
barriers, given the widespread prejudice against TGNC people. The
question of whether to disclose TGNC status on an adoption application
is a personal one, and a prospective TGNC parent would benefit from
consulting a lawyer for legal advice, including what the laws in their
jurisdiction say about disclosure. Given the extensive background
investigation frequently conducted, it may be difficult to avoid
disclosure. Many lawyers favor disclosure to avoid any potential legal
challenges during the adoption process (Minter & Wald, 2012).

In discussing family-building options with TGNC people, psychologists
are encouraged to remain aware that some of these options require
medical intervention and are not available everywhere, in addition to
being quite costly (Coleman et al., 2012). Psychologists may work with
clients to manage feelings of loss, grief, anger, and resentment that
may arise if TGNC people are unable to access or afford the services
they need for building a family (Bockting et al., 2006; De Sutter et
al., 2002).

When TGNC people consider beginning hormone therapy, psychologists may
engage them in a conversation about the possibly permanent effects on
fertility to better prepare TGNC people to make a fully informed
decision. This may be of special importance with TGNC adolescents and
young adults who often feel that family planning or loss of fertility is
not a significant concern in their current daily lives, and therefore
disregard the long-term reproductive implications of hormone therapy or
surgery (Coleman et al., 2012). Psychologists are encouraged to discuss
contraception and safer sex practices with TGNC people, given that they
may still have the ability to conceive even when undergoing hormone
therapy (Bockting, Robinson, & Rosser, 1998). Psychologists may play a
critical role in educating TGNC adolescents and young adults and their
parents about the long-term effects of medical interventions on
fertility and assist them in offering informed consent prior to pursuing
such interventions. Although hormone therapy may limit fertility
(Coleman et al., 2012), psychologists may encourage TGNC people to
refrain from relying on hormone therapy as the sole means of birth
control, even when a person has amenorrhea (Gorton & Grubb, 2014).
Education on safer sex practices may also be important, as some segments
of the TGNC community (e.g., trans women and people of color) are
especially vulnerable to sexually transmitted infections and have been
shown to have high prevalence and incidence rates of HIV infection
(Kellogg, Clements-Nolle, Dilley, Katz, & McFarland, 2001; Nemoto,
Operario, Keatley, Han, & Soma, 2004).

Depending on the timing and type of options selected, psychologists may
explore the physical, social, and emotional implications should TGNC
people choose to delay or stop hormone therapy, undergo fertility
treatment, or become pregnant. Psychological effects of stopping hormone
therapy may include depression, mood swings, and reactions to the loss
of physical masculinization or feminization facilitated by hormone
therapy (Coleman et al., 2012). TGNC people who choose to halt hormone
therapy during attempts to conceive or during a pregnancy may need
additional psychological support. For example, TGNC people and their
families may need help in managing the additional antitrans prejudice
and scrutiny that may result when a TGNC person with stereotypically
masculine features becomes visibly pregnant. Psychologists may also
assist TGNC people in addressing their loss when they cannot engage in
reproductive activities that are consistent with their gender identity,
or when they encounter barriers to conceiving, adopting, or fostering
children not typically faced by other people (Vanderburgh, 2007).
Psychologists are encouraged to assess the degree to which reproductive
health services are TGNC-affirmative prior to referring TGNC people to
them. Psychologists are also encouraged to provide TGNC-affirmative
information to reproductive health service personnel when there is a
lack of transaffirmative knowledge.

***Guideline 14. Psychologists recognize the potential benefits of an
interdisciplinary approach when providing care to TGNC people and strive
to work collaboratively with other providers.***

***Rationale.*** Collaboration across disciplines can be crucial when
working with TGNC people because of the potential interplay of
biological, psychological, and social factors in diagnosis and treatment
(Hendricks & Testa, 2012). The challenges of living with a stigmatized
identity and the need of many TGNC people to transition, socially and/or
medically, may call for the involvement of health professionals from
various disciplines, including psychologists, psychiatrists, social
workers, primary health care providers, endocrinologists, nurses,
pharmacists, surgeons, gynecologists, urologists, electrologists, speech
therapists, physical therapists, pastoral counselors and chaplains, and
career or educational counselors. Communication, cooperation, and
collaboration will ensure optimal coordination and quality of care. Just
as psychologists often refer TGNC people to medical providers for
assessment and treatment of medical issues, medical providers may rely
on psychologists to assess readiness and assist TGNC clients to prepare
for the psychological and social aspects of transition before, during,
and after medical interventions (Coleman et al., 2012; Hembree et al.,
2009; Lev, 2009). Outcome research to date supports the value and
effectiveness of an interdisciplinary, collaborative approach to
TGNC-specific care (see Coleman et al., 2012 for a review).

***Application.*** Psychologists' collaboration with colleagues in
medical and associated health disciplines involved in TGNC clients' care
(e.g., hormonal and surgical treatment, primary health care; Coleman et
al., 2012; Lev, 2009) may take many forms and should occur in a timely
manner that does not complicate access to needed services (e.g.,
considerations of wait time). For example, a psychologist working with a
trans man who has a diagnosis of bipolar disorder may need to coordinate
with his primary care provider and psychiatrist to adjust his hormone
levels and psychiatric medications, given that testosterone can have an
activating effect, in addition to treating gender dysphoria. At a basic
level, collaboration may entail the creation of required documentation
that TGNC people present to surgeons or medical providers to access
genderaffirming medical interventions (e.g., surgery, hormone therapy;
Coleman et al., 2012). Psychologists may offer support, information, and
education to interdisciplinary colleagues who are unfamiliar with issues
of gender identity and gender expression to assist TGNC people in
obtaining TGNC-affirmative care (Holman & Goldberg, 2006; Lev, 2009).
For example, a psychologist who is assisting a trans woman with
obtaining gender-affirming surgery may, with her consent, contact her
new gynecologist in preparation for her first medical visit. This
contact could include sharing general information about her gender
history and discussing how both providers could most affirmatively
support appropriate health checks to ensure her best physical health
(Holman & Goldberg, 2006).

Psychologists in interdisciplinary settings could also collaborate with
medical professionals prescribing hormone therapy by educating TGNC
people and ensuring TGNC people are able to make fully informed
decisions prior to starting hormone treatment (Coleman et al., 2012;
Deutsch, 2012; Lev, 2009). Psychologists working with children and
adolescents play a particularly important role on the interdisciplinary
team due to considerations of cognitive and social development, family
dynamics, and degree of parental support. This role is especially
crucial when providing psychological evaluation to determine the
appropriateness and timeliness of a medical intervention. When
psychologists are not part of an interdisciplinary setting, especially
in isolated or rural communities, they can identify interdisciplinary
colleagues with whom they may collaborate and/or refer (Walinsky &
Whitcomb, 2010). For example, a rural psychologist could identify a
trans-affirmative pediatrician in a surrounding area and collaborate
with the pediatrician to work with parents raising concerns about their
TGNC and questioning children and adolescents.

In addition to working collaboratively with other providers,
psychologists who obtain additional training to specialize in work with
TGNC people may also serve as consultants in the field (e.g., providing
additional support to providers working with TGNC people or assisting
school and workplaces with diversity training). Psychologists who have
expertise in working with TGNC people may play a consultative role with
providers in inpatient settings seeking to provide affirmative care to
TGNC clients. Psychologists may also collaborate with social service
colleagues to provide TGNC people with affirmative referrals related to
housing, financial support, vocational/educational counseling and
training, TGNC-affirming religious or spiritual communities, peer
support, and other community resources (Gehi & Arkles, 2007). This
collaboration might also include assuring that TGNC people who are
minors in the care of the state have access to culturally appropriate
care.

## Research, Education, and Training

***Guideline 15. Psychologists respect the welfare and rights of TGNC
participants in research and strive to represent results accurately and
avoid misuse or misrepresentation of findings.***

***Rationale.*** Historically, in a set of demographic questions,
psychological research has included one item on either sex or gender,
with two response options---male and female. This approach wastes an
opportunity to increase knowledge about TGNC people for whom neither
option may fit their identity, and runs the risk of alienating TGNC
research participants (IOM, 2011). For example, there is little
knowledge about HIV prevalence, risks, and prevention needs of TGNC
people because most of the research on HIV has not included demographic
questions to identify TGNC participants within their samples. Instead,
TGNC people have been historically subsumed within larger demographic
categories (e.g., men who have sex with men, women of color), rendering
the impact of the HIV epidemic on the TGNC population invisible (Herbst
et al., 2008). Scholars have noted that this invisibility fails to draw
attention to the needs of TGNC populations that experience the greatest
health disparities, including TGNC people who are of color, immigrants,
low income, homeless, veterans, incarcerated, live in rural areas, or
have disabilities (Bauer et al., 2009; Hanssmann, Morrison, Russian,
Shiu-Thornton, & Bowen, 2010; Shipherd et al., 2012; Walinsky &
Whitcomb, 2010).

There is a great need for more research to inform practice, including
affirmative treatment approaches with TGNC people. Although sufficient
evidence exists to support current standards of care (Byne et al., 2012;
Coleman et al., 2012), much is yet to be learned to optimize quality of
care and outcome for TGNC clients, especially as it relates to the
treatment of children (IOM, 2011; Mikalson et al., 2012). In addition,
some research with TGNC populations has been misused and misinterpreted,
negatively affecting TGNC people's access to health services to address
issues of gender identity and gender expression (Namaste, 2000). This
has resulted in justifiable skepticism and suspicion in the TGNC
community when invited to participate in research initiatives. In
accordance with the APA ethics code (APA, 2010), psychologists conduct
research and distribute research findings with integrity and respect for
their research participants. As TGNC research increases, some TGNC
communities may experience being oversampled in particular geographic
areas and/or TGNC people of color may not be well-represented in TGNC
studies (Hwahng & Lin, 2009; Namaste, 2000).

***Application.*** All psychologists conducting research, even when not
specific to TGNC populations, are encouraged to provide a range of
options for capturing demographic information about TGNC people so that
TGNC people may be included and accurately represented (Conron et al.,
2008; Deutsch et al., 2013). One group of experts has recommended that
population research, and especially government-sponsored surveillance
research, use a two-step method, first asking for sex assigned at birth,
and then following with a question about gender identity (GenIUSS,
2013). For research focused on TGNC people, including questions that
assess both sex assigned at birth and current gender identity allows the
disaggregation of subgroups within the TGNC population and has the
potential to increase knowledge of differences within the population. In
addition, findings about one subgroup of TGNC people may not apply to
other subgroups. For example, results from a study of trans women of
color with a history of sex work who live in urban areas (Nemoto,
Operario, Keatley, & Villegas, 2004) may not generalize to all TGNC
women of color or to the larger TGNC population (Bauer, Travers,
Scanlon, & Coleman, 2012; Operario et al., 2008).

In conducting research with TGNC people, psychologists will confront the
challenges associated with studying a relatively small, geographically
dispersed, diverse, stigmatized, hidden, and hard-to-reach population
(IOM, 2011). Because TGNC individuals are often hard to reach (IOM,
2011) and TGNC research is rapidly evolving, it is important to consider
the strengths and limitations of the methods that have been or may be
used to study the TGNC population, and to interpret and represent
findings accordingly. Some researchers have strongly recommended
collaborative research models (e.g., participatory action research) in
which TGNC community members are integrally involved in these research
activities (Clements-Nolle & Bachrach, 2003; Singh, Richmond, & Burnes,
2013). Psychologists who seek to educate the public by communicating
research findings in the popular media will also confront challenges,
because most journalists have limited knowledge about the scientific
method and there is potential for the media to misinterpret, exploit, or
sensationalize findings (Garber, 1992; Namaste, 2000).

***Guideline 16. Psychologists Seek to Prepare Trainees in Psychology to
Work Competently With TGNC People.***

***Rationale.*** The *Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of
Conduct* (APA, 2010) include gender identity as one factor for which
psychologists may need to obtain training, experience, consultation, or
supervision in order to ensure their competence (APA, 2010). In
addition, when APA-accredited programs are required to demonstrate a
commitment to cultural and individual diversity, gender identity is
specifically included (APA, 2015). Yet surveys of TGNC people suggest
that many mental health care providers lack even basic knowledge and
skills required to offer trans-affirmative care (Bradford et al., 2007;
O'Hara, Dispenza, Brack, & Blood, 2013; Xavier et al., 2005). The APA
Task Force on Gender Identity and Gender Variance (2009) projected that
many, if not most, psychologists and graduate psychology students will
at some point encounter TGNC people among their clients, colleagues, and
trainees. Yet professional education and training in psychology includes
little or no preparation for working with TGNC people (Anton, 2009; APA
TFGIGV, 2009), and continuing professional education available to
practicing mental health clinicians is also scant (Lurie, 2005). Only
52% percent of psychologists and graduate students who responded to a
survey conducted by an APA Task Force reported having had the
opportunity to learn about TGNC issues in school; of those respondents,
only 27% reported feeling adequately familiar with gender concerns (*n*
294; APA TFGIGV, 2009).

Training on gender identity in professional psychology has frequently
been subsumed under discussions of sexual orientation or in classes on
human sexuality. Some scholars have suggested that psychologists and
students may mistakenly believe that they have obtained adequate
knowledge and awareness about TGNC people through training focused on
LGB populations (Harper & Schneider, 2003). However, Israel and
colleagues have found important differences between the therapeutic
needs of TGNC people and those of LGB people in the perceptions of both
clients and providers (Israel et al., 2008; Israel, Walther, Gorcheva, &
Perry, 2011). Nadal and colleagues have suggested that the absence of
distinct, accurate information about TGNC populations in psychology
training not only perpetuates misunderstanding and marginalization of
TGNC people by psychologists but also contributes to continued
marginalization of TGNC people in society as a whole (Nadal et al.,
2010, 2012).

***Application.*** Psychologists strive to continue their education on
issues of gender identity and gender expression with TGNC people as a
foundational component of affirmative psychological practice. In
addition to these guidelines, which educators may use as a resource in
developing curricula and training experiences, ACA (2010) has also
adopted a set of competencies that may be a helpful resource for
educators. In addition to including TGNC people and their issues in
foundational education in health service psychology (e.g., personality
development, multiculturalism, research methods), some psychology
programs may also provide coursework and training for students
interested in developing more advanced expertise on issues of gender
identity and gender expression.

Because of the high level of societal ignorance and stigma associated
with TGNC people, ensuring that psychological education, training, and
supervision is affirmative, and does not sensationalize (Namaste, 2000),
exploit, or pathologize TGNC people (Lev, 2004), will require care on
the part of educators. Students will benefit from support from their
educators in developing a professional, nonjudgmental attitude toward
people who may have a different experience of gender identity and gender
expression from their own. A number of training resources have been
published that may be helpful to psychologists in integrating
information about TGNC people into the training they offer (e.g.,
Catalano, McCarthy, & Shlasko, 2007; Stryker, 2008; Wentling, Schilt,
Windsor, & Lucal, 2008). Because most psychologists have had little or
no training on TGNC populations and do not perceive themselves as having
sufficient understanding of issues related to gender identity and gender
expression (APA TFGIGV, 2009), psychologists with relevant expertise are
encouraged to develop and distribute continuing education and training
to help to address these gaps. Psychologists providing education can
incorporate activities that increase awareness of cisgender privilege,
antitrans prejudice and discrimination, host a panel of TGNC people to
offer personal perspectives, or include narratives of TGNC people in
course readings (ACA, 2010). When engaging these approaches, it is
important to include a wide variety of TGNC experiences to reflect the
inherent diversity within the TGNC community.

### REFERENCES

Adelson, S. L., & The American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry (AACAP) Committee on Quality Issues (CQI). (2012). Practice
parameter on gay, lesbian, or bisexual sexual orientation, gender
nonconformity, and gender discordance in children and adolescents.
*Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 51,*
957--974. [http://download.journals.elsevierhealth.com/pdfs/
journals/0890-8567/PIIS089085671200500X.pdf.](http://download.journals.elsevierhealth.com/pdfs/journals/0890-8567/PIIS089085671200500X.pdf)
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2012.07.004>

Ålgars, M., Alanko, K., Santtila, P., & Sandnabba, N. K. (2012).
Disordered eating and gender identity disorder: A qualitative study.
*Eating Disorders: The Journal of Treatment & Prevention, 20,* 300--311.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10640266.2012.668482>

Amato, P. R. (2001). Children of divorce in the 1990s: An update of the
Amato and Keith (1991) meta-analysis. *Journal of Family Psychology,
15,* 355--370.

American Civil Liberties Union National Prison Project. (2005). *Still
in danger: The ongoing threat of sexual violence against transgender
prisoners*. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from
<http://www.justdetention.org/pdf/stillindanger.pdf>

American Counseling Association. (2010). American Counseling Association
competencies for counseling with transgender clients. *Journal of LGBT
Issues in Counseling, 4,* 135--159. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
15538605.2010.524839](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15538605.2010.524839)

American Psychiatric Association. (1980). *Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders* (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2000). *Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders* (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC:
Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). *Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders* (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Publishing.

American Psychological Association. (2010). *Ethical principles of
psychologists and code of conduct* (2002, amended June 1, 2010).
Retrieved from <http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/principles.pdf>

American Psychological Association. (2012). Guidelines for psychological
practice with lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients. *American
Psychologist, 67,* 10--42. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0024659>

American Psychological Association. (2015). *Standards of accreditation
for health service psychology*. Retrieved from [http://www.apa.org/ed/
accreditation/about/policies/standards-of-accreditation.pdf](http://www.apa.org/ed/accreditation/about/policies/standards-of-accreditation.pdf)

American Psychological Association & National Association of School
Psychologists. (2014). *Resolution on gender and sexual orientation
diversity in children and adolescents in schools*. Retrieved from
[http://
www.nasponline.org/about_nasp/resolution/gender_sexual_orientation\_
diversity.pdf](http://www.nasponline.org/about_nasp/resolution/gender_sexual_orientation_diversity.pdf)

American Psychological Association Presidential Task Force on
Immigration. (2012). *Crossroads: The psychology of immigration in the
new century*. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from
[http://www.apa.org/
topics/immigration/report.aspx](http://www.apa.org/topics/immigration/report.aspx)

American Psychological Association Task Force on Gender Identity and
Gender Variance. (2009). *Report of the task force on gender identity
and gender variance*. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from [http://
www.apa.org/pi/lgbt/resources/policy/gender-identity-report.pdf](http://www.apa.org/pi/lgbt/resources/policy/gender-identity-report.pdf)

Angello, M. (2013). *On the couch with Dr. Angello: A guide to raising &
supporting transgender youth*. Philadelphia, PA: Author.

Anton, B. S. (2009). Proceedings of the American Psychological
Association for the legislative year 2008: Minutes of the annual meeting
of the Council of Representatives. *American Psychologist, 64,*
372--453. [http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0015932](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0015932)

APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice. (2006).
Evidence-based practice in psychology. *American Psychologist, 61,*
271-- 285. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.61.4.271>

Auldridge, A., Tamar-Mattis, A., Kennedy, S., Ames, E., & Tobin, H. J.
(2012). *Improving the lives of transgender older adults:
Recommendations for policy and practice*. New York, NY: Services and
Advocacy for LGBT Elders & Washington. DC: National Center for
Transgender Equality. Retrieved from
[http://www.lgbtagingcenter.org/resources/
resource.cfm?r520](http://www.lgbtagingcenter.org/resources/resource.cfm?r=520)

Bailey, J. M., & Zucker, K. J. (1995). Childhood sex-typed behavior and
sexual orientation: A conceptual analysis and quantitative review.
*Developmental Psychology, 31,* 43--55.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/00121649.31.1.43](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.31.1.43)

Baltieri, D. A., & De Andrade, A. G. (2009). Schizophrenia modifying the
expression of gender identity disorder. *Journal of Sexual Medicine, 6,*
1185--1188. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1743-6109.2007.00655.x>

Bauer, G. R., Hammond, R., Travers, R., Kaay, M., Hohenadel, K. M., &
Boyce, M. (2009). "I don't think this is theoretical; this is our
lives": How erasure impacts health care for transgender people. *JANAC:
Journal of the Association of Nurses in AIDS Care, 20,* 348--361.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jana.2009.07.004>

Bauer, G. R., Travers, R., Scanlon, K., & Coleman, T. A. (2012). High
heterogeneity of HIV-related sexual risk among transgender people in
Ontario, Canada: A province-wide respondent-driven sampling survey. *BMC
Public Health, 12,* 292.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12292](http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-292)

Bazargan, M., & Galvan, F. (2012). Perceived discrimination and
depression among low-income Latina male-to-female transgender women.
*BMC Public Health, 12,* 663--670.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-663>

Beemyn, G., & Rankin, S. (2011). *The lives of transgender people*. New
York, NY: Columbia University.

Bender-Baird, K. (2011). *Transgender employment experiences: Gendered
exceptions and the law*. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

Benjamin, H. (1966). *The transsexual phenomenon*. New York, NY: Warner.

Benson, K. E. (2013). Seeking support: Transgender client experiences
with mental health services. *Journal of Feminist Family Therapy: An
International Forum, 25,* 17--40. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08952833
.2013.755081](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08952833.2013.755081)

Berger, J. C., Green, R., Laub, D. R., Reynolds, C. L., Jr., Walker, P.
A., & Wollman, L. (1979). *Standards of care: The hormonal and surgical
sex reassignment of gender dysphoric persons*. Galveston, TX: The Janus
Information Facility.

Bess, J. A., & Stabb, S. D. (2009). The experiences of transgendered
persons in psychotherapy: Voices and recommendations. *Journal of Mental
Health Counseling, 31,* 264--282. [http://dx.doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.31.3.f62415468l133w50](http://dx.doi.org/10.17744/mehc.31.3.f62415468l133w50)

Bethea, M. S., & McCollum, E. E. (2013). The disclosure experiences of
male-to-female transgender individuals: A Systems Theory perspective.
*Journal of Couple & Relationship Therapy, 12,* 89--112. [http://dx.doi
.org/10.1080/15332691.2013.779094](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15332691.2013.779094)

Bilodeau, B. L., & Renn, K. A. (2005). Analysis of LGBT identity
development models and implications for practice. *New Directions for
Student Services, 2005,* 25--39. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ss.171>

Birren, J. E., & Schaie, K. W. (2006). *Handbook of the psychology of
aging* (6th ed.). Burlington, MA: Elsevier Academic.

Blosnich, J. R., Brown, G. R., Shipherd, J. C., Kauth, M., Piegari, R.
I., & Bossarte, R. M. (2013). Prevalence of gender identity disorder and
suicide risk among transgender veterans utilizing Veterans Health
Administration care. *American Journal of Public Health, 103*(10), e27--
e32. <http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301507>

Bockting, W. O. (2008). Psychotherapy and the real life experience: From
gender dichotomy to gender diversity. *Sexologies, 17,* 211--224.
[http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sexol.2008.08.001](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sexol.2008.08.001)

Bockting, W. O., Benner, A., & Coleman, E. (2009). Gay and bisexual
identity development among female-to-male transsexuals in North America:
Emergence of a transgender sexuality. *Archives of Sexual*

*Behavior, 38,* 688--701. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-009-9489-3>
Bockting, W. O., & Cesaretti, C. (2001). Spirituality, transgender
identity, and coming out. *The Journal of Sex Education, 26,* 291--300.

Bockting, W. O., & Coleman, E. (2007). Developmental stages of the
transgender coming-out process. In R. Ettner, S. Monstrey, & A. Eyler
(Eds.), *Principles of transgender medicine and surgery* (pp. 185--208).
New York, NY: Haworth.

Bockting, W. O., Knudson, G., & Goldberg, J. M. (2006). Counseling and
mental health care for transgender adults and loved ones. *International
Journal of Transgenderism, 9,* 35--82. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/
J485v09n03_03](http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J485v09n03_03)

Bockting, W. O., Miner, M. H., Swinburne Romine, R. E., Hamilton, A., &
Coleman, E. (2013). Stigma, mental health, and resilience in an online
sample of the US transgender population. *American Journal of Public
Health, 103,* 943--951. [http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013
.301241](http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301241)

Bockting, W. O., Robinson, B. E., & Rosser, B. R. S. (1998). Transgender
HIV prevention: A qualitative needs assessment. *AIDS Care, 10,* 505--
525. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09540129850124028>

Bolin, A. (1994). Transcending and transgendering: Male-to-female
transsexuals, dichotomy and diversity. In G. Herdt (Ed.), *Third sex,
third gender, beyond sexual dimorphism in culture and history* (pp.
447-- 486). New York, NY: Zone Books.

Bornstein, K., & Bergman, S. B. (2010). *Gender outlaws: The next
generation*. Berkeley, CA: Seal Press.

Boulder Valley School District. (2012). *Guidelines regarding the
support of students who are transgender and gender nonconforming*.
Boulder, CO: Author. Retrieved from
[http://www.bvsd.org/policies/Policies/
AC-E3.pdf](http://www.bvsd.org/policies/Policies/AC-E3.pdf)

Bouman, W. P., Richards, C., Addinall, R. M., Arango de Montis, I.,
Arcelus, J., Duisin, D., . . . Wilson, D. (2014). Yes and yes again: Are
standards of care which require two referrals for genital reconstructive
surgery ethical? *Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 29,* 377--389.
[http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/14681994.2014.954993](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14681994.2014.954993)

Boylan, J. F. (2013). *She's not there* (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
Broadway Books.

Bradford, J., Reisner, S. L., Honnold, J. A., & Xavier, J. (2013).
Experiences of transgender-related discrimination and implications for
health: Results from the Virginia Transgender Health Initiative Study.
*American Journal of Public Health, 103,* 1820--1829.
[http://dx.doi.org/10
.2105/AJPH.2012.300796](http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2012.300796)

Bradford, J., Xavier, J., Hendricks, M., Rives, M. E., & Honnold, J. A.
(2007). The health, health-related needs, and lifecourse experiences of
transgender Virginians. *Virginia Transgender Health Initiative Study
Statewide Survey Report*. Retrieved from [http://www.vdh.state.va.us/
epidemiology/DiseasePrevention/documents/pdf/THISFINALREPORTVol1
.pdf](http://www.vdh.state.va.us/epidemiology/DiseasePrevention/documents/pdf/THISFINALREPORTVol1.pdf)

Brewster, M. E., Velez, B. L., Mennicke, A., & Tebbe, E. (2014). Voices
from beyond: A thematic content analysis of transgender employees'
workplace experiences. *Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender
Diversity, 1,* 159--169. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000030>

Brill, S., & Pepper, R. (2008). *The transgender child: A handbook for
families and professionals*. San Francisco, CA: Cleis Press.

Broido, E. M. (2000). Constructing identity: The nature and meaning of
lesbian, gay, and bisexual lives. In R. M. Perez, K. A. DeBord, & K. J.
Bieschke (Eds.), *Handbook of counseling and psychotherapy with lesbian,
gay, and bisexual clients* (pp. 13--33). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10339-001>
Brotheim, H. (2013). Transgender inmates: The dilemma. *American Jails,
27,* 40--47.

Brown, N. (2007). Stories from outside the frame: Intimate partner abuse
in sexual-minority women's relationships with transsexual men. *Feminism
& Psychology, 17,* 373--393.

Bullough, V. L., & Bullough, B. (1993). *Cross dressing, sex, and
gender*. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Burnes, T. R., & Chen, M. M. (2012). The multiple identities of
transgender individuals: Incorporating a framework of intersectionality
to gender crossing. In R. Josselson & M. Harway (Eds.), *Navigating
multiple identities: Race, gender, culture, nationality, and roles* (pp.
113--128). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. [http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199732074.003.0007](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199732074.003.0007)

Butler, J. (1990). *Gender trouble and the subversion of identity*. New
York, NY: Routledge.

Buzuvis, E. (2013). "On the basis of sex": Using Title IX to protect
transgender students from discrimination in education. *Wisconsin
Journal of Law, Gender & Society, 28,* 219--347.

Byne, W., Bradley, S. J., Coleman, E., Eyler, A. E., Green, R.,
Menvielle, E. J., . . . American Psychiatric Association Task Force on
Treatment of Gender Identity Disorder. (2012). Report of the American
Psychiatric Association Task Force on Treatment of Gender Identity
Disorder. *Archives of Sexual Behavior, 41,* 759--796.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10508-012-9975-x](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-012-9975-x)

Califia, P. (1997). *Sex changes: The politics of transgenderism*. San
Francisco, CA: Cleis Press.

Carroll, L. (2010). *Counseling sexual and gender minorities*. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Merrill.

Carroll, R. (1999). Outcomes of treatment for gender dysphoria. *Journal
of Sex Education & Therapy, 24,* 128--136.

Case, K. A., & Meier, S. C. (2014). Developing allies to transgender and
gender-nonconforming youth: Training for counselors and educators.
*Journal of LGBT Youth, 11,* 62--82. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19361653
.2014.840764](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19361653.2014.840764)

Catalano, C., McCarthy, L., & Shlasko, D. (2007). Transgender oppression
curriculum design. In M. Adams, L. A. Bell, & P. Griffin (Eds.),
*Teaching for diversity and social justice* (2nd ed., p. 219245). New
York, NY: Routledge.

Cavanaugh, J. C., & Blanchard-Fields, F. (2010). *Adult development and
aging* (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.

Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. (2012). *A provider's introduction
to substance abuse treatment for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
individuals* (DHHS Pub. No. \[SMA\] 21--4104). Rockville, MD: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration, Center for Substance Abuse Treatment.

Cerezo, A., Morales, A., Quintero, D., & Rothman, S. (2014). Trans
migrations: Exploring life at the intersection of transgender identity
and immigration. *Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity,
1,* 170--180. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000031>

Chivers, M. L., & Bailey, J. M. (2000). Sexual orientation of
female-tomale transsexuals: A comparison of homosexual and nonhomosexual
types. *Archives of Sexual Behavior, 29,* 259--278.
[http://dx.doi.org/10
.1023/A:1001915530479](http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1001915530479)

Clements-Nolle, K., & Bachrach, A. (2003). Community based participatory
research with a hidden population: The transgender community health
project. In M. Minkler & N. Wallerstein (Eds.), *Community based
participatory research for health* (pp. 332--343). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.

Clements-Nolle, K., Marx, R., & Katz, M. (2006). Attempted suicide among
transgender persons: The influence of gender-based discrimination and
victimization. *Journal of Homosexuality, 51,* 53--69. [http://dx
.doi.org/10.1300/J082v51n03_04](http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J082v51n03_04)

Cochran, B. N., & Cauce, A. M. (2006). Characteristics of lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender individuals entering substance abuse
treatment. *Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 30,* 135--146.
[http://dx
.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2005.11.009](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2005.11.009)

Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., Delemarre-van de Waal, H. A., & Gooren, L. J. G.
(2008). The treatment of adolescent transsexuals: Changing insights.
*Journal of Sexual Medicine, 5,* 1892--1897.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1743-6109.2008.00870.x>

Cole, B., & Han, L. (2011). *Freeing ourselves: A guide to health and
self love for brown bois*. Retrieved from [https://brownboiproject
.nationbuilder.com/health_guide](http://brownboiproject.nationbuilder.com/health_guide)

Coleman, E., & Bockting, W. O. (1988). "Heterosexual" prior to sex
reassignment, "homosexual" afterwards: A case study of a female-tomale
transsexual. *Journal of Psychology & Human Sexuality, 1,* 69--82.

Coleman, E., Bockting, W., Botzer, M., Cohen-Kettenis, P., DeCuypere,
G., Feldman, J., . . . Zucker, K. (2012). Standards of care for the
health of transsexual, transgender, and gender nonconforming people, 7th
version. *International Journal of Transgenderism, 13,* 165--232.
[http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2011.700873](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2011.700873)

Coleman, E., Bockting, W. O., & Gooren, L. (1993). Homosexual and
bisexual identity in sex-reassigned female-to-male transsexuals.
*Archives of Sexual Behavior, 22,* 37--50. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF01552911](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01552911)

Coleman, E., Colgan, P., & Gooren, L. (1992). Male cross-gender behavior
in Myanmar (Burma): A description of the acault. *Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 21,* 313--321. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01542999>

Collins, P. H. (2000). *Black feminist thought: Knowledge,
consciousness, and the politics of empowerment* (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
Routledge.

Conron, K. J., Scott, G., Stowell, G. S., & Landers, S. J. (2012).
Transgender health in Massachusetts: Results from a household
probability sample of adults. *American Journal of Public Health, 102,*
118--122. <http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300315>

Conron, K. J., Scout, & Austin, S. B. (2008). "Everyone has a right to,
like, check their box": Findings on a measure of gender identity from a
cognitive testing study with adolescents. *Journal of LGBT Health
Research, 4,* 1--9.

Cook-Daniels, L. (2006). Trans aging. In D. Kimmel, T. Rose, & S. David
(Eds.), *Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender aging: Research and
clinical perspectives* (pp. 20--35). New York, NY: Columbia University
Press.

Coolhart, D., Provancher, N., Hager, A., & Wang, M. (2008). Recommending
transsexual clients for gender transition: A therapeutic tool for
assessing gender. *Journal of GLBT Family Studies, 4,* 301--324.
[http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/15504280802177466](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15504280802177466)

Currah, P., & Minter, S. P. (2000). *Transgender equality: A handbook
for activists and policymakers*. San Francisco, CA: National Center for
Lesbian Rights; New York, NY: The Policy Institute of the National Gay &
Lesbian Task Force. Retrieved from [http://www.thetaskforce
.org/static_html/downloads/reports/reports/TransgenderEquality.pdf](http://www.thetaskforce.org/static_html/downloads/reports/reports/TransgenderEquality.pdf)

Daley, A., Solomon, S., Newman, P. A., & Mishna, F. (2008). Traversing
the margins: Intersectionalities in the bullying of lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender youth. *Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social
Services: Issues in Practice, Policy & Research, 19,* 9--29.
[http://dx.doi.org/10
.1080/10538720802161474](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10538720802161474)

Daley, C. (2005, August 15). *Testimony before the National Prison Rape
Elimination Commission*. Retrieved from [http://transgenderlawcenter
.org/pdf/prisonrape.pdf](http://transgenderlawcenter.org/pdf/prisonrape.pdf)

Darnery, P. D. (2008). Hormonal contraception. In H. M. Kronenberg, S.
Melmer, K. S. Polonsky, & P. R. Larsen (Eds.), *Williams textbook of
endocrinology* (11th ed., pp. 615--644). Philadelphia, PA: Saunders.

Daskalos, C. T. (1998). Changes in the sexual orientation of six
heterosexual male-to-female transsexuals. *Archives of Sexual Behavior,
27,* 605--614. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1018725201811>

D'Augelli, A. R., & Hershberger, S. L. (1993). Lesbian, gay, and
bisexual youth in community settings: Personal challenges and mental
health problems. *American Journal of Community Psychology, 21,*
421--448. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00942151>

Davis, S. A., & Meier, S. C. (2014). Effects of testosterone treatment
and chest reconstruction surgery on mental health and sexuality in
femaleto-male transgender people. *International Journal of Sexual
Health, 26,* 113--128. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19317611.2013.833152>

De Cuypere, G., Elaut, E., Heylens, G., Van Maele, G., Selvaggi, G.,
T'Sjoen, G., . . . Monstrey, S. (2006). Long-term follow-up:
Psychosocial outcomes of Belgian transsexuals after sex reassignment
surgery.

*Sexologies, 15,* 126--133.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sexol.2006.04.002>

Department of Defense. (2011). *Instruction: Number 6130.03*. Retrieved
from <http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/613003p.pdf>

Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans' Health Administration. (2013).
*Providing health care for transgender and intersex veterans (VHA
Directive 2013--003)*. Retrieved from
[http://www.va.gov/vhapublications/
ViewPublication.asp?pub_ID2863](http://www.va.gov/vhapublications/ViewPublication.asp?pub_ID=2863)

De Sutter, P., Kira, K., Verschoor, A., & Hotimsky, A. (2002). The
desire to have children and the preservation of fertility in transsexual
women: A survey. *International Journal of Transgenderism, 6*(3),
215--221.

Deutsch, M. B. (2012). Use of the informed consent model in provision of
cross-sex hormone therapy: A survey of the practices of selected
clinics. *International Journal of Transgenderism, 13,* 140--146.
[http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2011.675233](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2011.675233)

Deutsch, M. B., Green, J., Keatley, J. A., Mayer, G., Hastings, J.,
Hall, A. M., . . . the World Professional Association for Transgender
Health EMR Working Group. (2013). Electronic medical records and the
transgender patient: Recommendations from the World Professional
Association for Transgender Health EMR Working Group. *Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 20,* 700--703.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2012-001472>

Devor, A. H. (2004). Witnessing and mirroring: A fourteen-stage model of
transsexual identity formation. *Journal of Gay & Lesbian Psychotherapy,
8,* 41--67.

Devor, H. (1993). Sexual orientation identities, attractions, and
practices of female-to-male transsexuals. *Journal of Sex Research, 30,*
303--315. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00224499309551717>

de Vries, A. L., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2012). Clinical management of
gender dysphoria in children and adolescents: The Dutch approach.
*Journal of Homosexuality, 59,* 301--320.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2012.653300)

[00918369.2012.653300](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2012.653300)
de Vries, A. L. C., McGuire, J. K., Steensma, T. D., Wagenaar, E. C. F.,
Doreleijers, T. A. H., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2014). Young adult
psychological outcome after puberty suppression and gender reassignment.
*Pediatrics, 134,* 696--704.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-](http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-2958)

[2958](http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-2958) de Vries, A. L., Noens,
I. L., Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., van BerckelaerOnnes, I. A., & Doreleijers,
T. A. (2010). Autism spectrum disorders in gender dysphoric children and
adolescents. *Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 40,*
930--936. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10803-010-0935-9](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10803-010-0935-9)

de Vries, A. L., Steensma, T. D., Doreleijers, T. A., & Cohen-Kettenis,
P. T. (2011). Puberty suppression in adolescents with gender identity
disorder: A prospective follow-up study. *Journal of Sexual Medicine,
8,*

2276--2283. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1743-6109.2010.01943.x> de
Vries, K. M. (2015). Transgender people of color at the center:
Conceptualizing a new intersectional model. *Ethnicities, 15,* 3--27.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1468796814547058>

Dhejne, C., Lichtenstein, P., Boman, M., Johansson, A. L. V., Långström,
N., & Landén, M. (2011). Long-term follow-up of transsexual persons
undergoing sex reassignment surgery: Cohort study in Sweden. *PLoS ONE,
6*(2), e16885. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016885> Diamond,
L. M. (2013). Concepts of female sexual orientation. In C. J. Patterson
& A. R. D'Augelli (Eds.), *Handbook of psychology and sexual
orientation* (pp. 3--17). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Diamond, M. (2009). Human intersexuality: Difference or disorder?
*Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38,* 172.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-008-9438-6)

[008-9438-6](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-008-9438-6) dickey, l. m.,
Burnes, T. R., & Singh, A. A. (2012). Sexual identity development of
female-to-male transgender individuals: A grounded theory inquiry.
*Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling, 6,* 118--138.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15538605.2012.678184>

dickey, l. m., Reisner, S. L., & Juntunen, C. L. (2015). Non-suicidal
self-injury in a large online sample of transgender adults.
*Professional
Psychology:ResearchandPractice,46,*3--11.[http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
a0038803](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0038803)

Dispenza, F., Watson, L. B., Chung, Y. B., & Brack, G. (2012).
Experience of career-related discrimination for female-to-male
transgender persons: A qualitative study. *Career Development Quarterly,
60,* 65-- 81. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/j.2161-0045.2012.00006.x>

Dreger, A. D. (1999). *Intersex in the age of ethics*. Hagerstown, MD:
University Publishing Group.

Drescher, J. (2014). Controversies in gender diagnosis. *LGBT Health,
1,* 10--14. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/lgbt.2013.1500>

Drescher, J., & Byne, W. (Eds.). (2013). *Treating transgender children
and adolescents: An interdisciplinary discussion*. New York, NY:
Routledge.

Drummond, K. D., Bradley, S. J., Peterson-Badaali, M., & Zucker, K. J.
(2008). A follow- up study of girls with gender identity disorder.
*Developmental Psychology, 44,* 34--45. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
0012-1649.44.1.34](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.44.1.34)

Edelman, E. A. (2011). "This area has been declared a prostitution free
zone": Discursive formations of space, the state, and trans "sex worker"
bodies. *Journal of Homosexuality, 58,* 848--864. [http://dx.doi.org/10
.1080/00918369.2011.581928](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2011.581928)

Edwards-Leeper, L., & Spack, N. P. (2012). Psychological evaluation and
medical treatment of transgender youth in an interdisciplinary "Gender
Management Service" (GeMS) in a major pediatric center. *Journal of
Homosexuality, 59,* 321--336. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2012
.653302](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2012.653302)

Ehrbar, R. D., & Gorton, R. N. (2010). Exploring provider treatment
models in interpreting the Standards of Care. *International Journal of
Transgenderism, 12,* 198--210. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739
.2010.544235](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2010.544235)

Ehrensaft, D. (2012). From gender identity disorder to gender identity
creativity: True gender self child therapy. *Journal of Homosexuality,
59,* 337--356. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2012.653303> Ekins,
R., & King, D. (2005). Virginia Prince: Pioneer of transgendering.
*International Journal of Transgenderism, 8,* 5--15.
[http://dx.doi.org/10
.1300/J485v08n04_02](http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J485v08n04_02)

Elders, J., & Steinman, A. M. (2014). *Report of the transgender
military service commission*. Retrieved from
[http://www.palmcenter.org/files/
Transgender%20Military%20Service%20Report_0.pdf](http://www.palmcenter.org/files/Transgender%20Military%20Service%20Report_0.pdf)

Emerson, S., & Rosenfeld, C. (1996). Stages of adjustment in family
members of transgender individuals. *Journal of Family Psychotherapy,
7,* 1--12. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J085V07N03_01>

Erhardt, V. (2007). *Head over heals: Wives who stay with cross-dressers
and transsexuals*. New York, NY: Haworth.

Erikson, E. H. (1968). *Identity, youth, and crisis*. New York, NY:
Norton.

Factor, R. J., & Rothblum, E. D. (2007). A study of transgender adults
and their non-transgender siblings on demographic characteristics,
social support and experiences of violence. *Journal of LGBT Health
Research, 3,* 11--30. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15574090802092879>

Feinberg, L. (1996). *Transgender warriors: Making history from Joan of
Arc to Dennis Rodman*. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.

Flynn, T. (2006). The ties that (don't) bind. In P. Currah, R. M. Juang,
& S. P. Minter (Eds.), *Transgender rights* (pp. 32--50). Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota.

FORGE. (n.d.). *Trans-specific power and control tactics*. Retrieved
from
[http://forge-forward.org/wp-content/docs/power-control-tactics-categories\_
FINAL.pdf](http://forge-forward.org/wp-content/docs/power-control-tactics-categories_FINAL.pdf)

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Cook-Daniels, L., Kim, H. J., Erosheva, E.
A., Emlet, C. A., Hoy-Ellis, C. P., . . . Muraco, A. (2014). Physical
and mental health of transgender older adults: An at-risk and
underserved population. *The Gerontologist, 54,* 488--500.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
geront/gnt021](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geront/gnt021)

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Kim, H., Emlet, C. A., Muraco, A., Erosheva,
E. A., Hoy-Ellis, C. P., . . . Petry, H. (2011). *The aging and health
report: Disparities and resilience among lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender older adults*. Retrieved from <http://caringandaging.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/Full-Report-FINAL.pdf>

Freeman, D., Tasker, F., & Di Ceglie, D. (2002). Children and
adolescents with transsexual parents referred to a specialist gender
identity development service: A brief report of key development
features. *Clinical
ChildPsychologyandPsychiatry,7,*423--432. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1359104502007003009>

Fruhauf, C. A., & Orel, N. A. (2015). Fostering resilience in LGBT aging
individuals and families. In N. A. Orel & C. A. Fruhauf (Eds.), *The
lives of LGBT older adults: Understanding challenges and resilience*
(pp. 217--227). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Fuhrmann, M., & Craffey, B. (2014). *Lessons learned on the path to
filial maturity*. Charleston, SC: Createspace.

Fuhrmann, M., & Shevlowitz, J. (2006). *Sagacity: What I learned from my
elderly psychotherapy clients*. Bloomington, IN: IUniverse.

Gallagher, S. (2014). The cruel and unusual phenomenology of solitary
confinement. *Frontiers in Psychology, 5,* 1--8.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00585>

Garber, M. B. (1992). *Vested interests: Cross-dressing & cultural
anxiety*. New York, NY: Routledge.

Garofalo, R., Deleon, J., Osmer, E., Doll, M., & Harper, G. W. (2006).
Overlooked, misunderstood, and at-risk: Exploring the lives and HIV risk
of ethnic minority male-to-female transgender youth. *Journal of
Adolescent Health, 38,* 230--236.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2005.03.023>

Gehi, P. S., & Arkles, G. (2007). Unraveling injustice: Race and class
impact of Medicaid exclusions of transition-related health care for
transgender people. *Sexuality Research & Social Policy, 4,* 7--35.
[http://
dx.doi.org/10.1525/srsp.2007.4.4.7](http://dx.doi.org/10.1525/srsp.2007.4.4.7)

GenIUSS. (2013). *Gender-related measures overview*. Los Angeles, CA:
Williams Institute. Retrieved from:
<http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/GenIUSS-Gender-related-Question-Overview.pdf>

Glaser, C. (Ed.), (2008). *Gender identity and our faith communities: A
congregational guide to transgender advocacy*. Washington, DC:
Human Rights Campaign Foundation. Retrieved from <http://www.hrc.org/resources/entry/gender-identity-and-our-faith-communities-a-congregational-guide-for-transg>

Glezer, A., McNiel, D. E., & Binder, R. L. (2013). Transgendered and
incarcerated: A review of the literature, current policies and laws and
ethics. *Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry Law, 41,* 551--
559.

Goldblum, P., Testa, R. J., Pflum, S., Hendricks, M. L., Bradford, J., &
Bongar, B. (2012). In-school gender-based victimization and suicide
attempts in transgender individuals. *Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 43,* 468--475. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029605>

Gonzalez, M., & McNulty, J. (2010). Achieving competency with
transgender youth: School counselors as collaborative advocates.
*Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling, 4,* 176--186.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
15538605.2010.524841](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15538605.2010.524841)

Gooren, L. J., Giltay, E. J., Bunck, M. C. (2008). Long-term treatment
of transsexuals with cross-sex hormones: Extensive personal experience.
*Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism: Clinical and
Experimental, 93,* 19--25. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jc.2007-1809>

Gorton, R. N., & Grubb, H. M. (2014). General, sexual, and reproductive
health. In L. Erickson-Schroth (Ed.), *Trans bodies, trans selves: A
resource for the transgender community* (pp. 215--240). New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.

Grant, J. M., Mottet, L. A., Tanis, J., Harrison, J., Herman, J. L., &
Kiesling, M. (2011). *Injustice at every turn: A report of the national
transgender discrimination survey*. Washington, DC: National Center for
Transgender Equality & National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. Retrieved
from [http://endtransdiscrimination.org/PDFs/NTDS_Report
.pdf](http://endtransdiscrimination.org/PDFs/NTDS_Report.pdf)

Green, E. R. (2006). Debating trans inclusion in the feminist movement:
A trans-positive analysis. *Journal of Lesbian Studies, 10*(1/2),
231--248. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J155v10n01_12>

Green, J. (2004). *Becoming a visible man*. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt
University.

Green, R. (1978). Sexual identity of 37 children raised by homosexual
and transsexual parents. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 135,*
692--697. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/ajp.135.6.692>

Green, R. (1988). Transsexuals' children. *International Journal of
Transgendersim, 2*(4).

Green, R., & Money, J. (1969). *Transsexualism and sex reassignment*.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Grossman, A. H., & D'Augelli, A. R. (2006). Transgender youth: Invisible
and vulnerable. *Journal of Homosexuality, 51,* 111--128. [http://dx
.doi.org/10.1300/J082v51n01_06](http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J082v51n01_06)

Grossman, A. H., D'Augelli, A. R., Howell, T. H., & Hubbard, A. (2006).
Parent reactions to transgender youth gender nonconforming expression
and identity. *Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social Services, 18,* 3--16.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J041v18n01_02>

Gruberg, S. (2013). *Dignity denied: LGBT immigrants in U.S*. Retrieved
from [https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/immigration/report/
2013/11/25/79987/dignity-denied-lgbt-immigrants-in-u-s-immigrationdetention/](http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/immigration/report/2013/11/25/79987/dignity-denied-lgbt-immigrants-in-u-s-immigration-detention/)

Hanssmann, C., Morrison, D., Russian, E., Shiu-Thornton, S., & Bowen, D.
(2010). A community-based program evaluation of community competency
trainings. *Journal of the Association of Nurses in AIDS Care, 21,*
240--255. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jana.2009.12.007>

Hardy, S. E., Concato, J., & Gill, T. M. (2004). Resilience of
communitydwelling older persons. *Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society, 52,* 257--262.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2004.52065.x>

Harper, G. W., & Schneider, M. (2003). Oppression and discrimination
among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered people and communities:
A challenge for community psychology. *American Journal of Community
Psychology, 31,* 246--252. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/
A:1023906620085](http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1023906620085)

Harrison, J., Grant, J., & Herman, J. L. (2012). A gender not listed
here: Genderqueers, gender rebels and otherwise in the National
Transgender Discrimination Study. *LGBT Policy Journal at the Harvard
Kennedy School, 2,* 13--24. Retrieved from
[http://isites.harvard.edu/icb/
icb.do?keywordk78405&pageidicb.page497030](http://isites.harvard.edu/icb/icb.do?keyword=k78405&pageid=icb.page497030)

Hartzell, E., Frazer, M. S., Wertz, K., & Davis, M. (2009). *The state
of transgender California: Results from the 2008 California Transgender
Economic Health survey*. San Francisco, CA: Transgender Law Center.
Retrieved from <http://transgenderlawcenter.org/pubs/the-state-of-transgender-california>

Harvard Law Review Association. (2013). Recent case: Employment law:
Title VII: EEOC affirms protections for transgender employees: Macy v.
Holder. *Harvard Law Review, 126,* 1731--1738.

Hastings, D. W. (1974). Postsurgical adjustment of male transsexual
patients. *Clinics in Plastic Surgery, 1,* 335--344.

Hastings, D., & Markland, C. (1978). Post-surgical adjustment of
twentyfive transsexuals (male-to-female) in the University of Minnesota
study. *Archives of Sexual Behavior, 7,* 327--336.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF01542041](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01542041)

Hembree, W. C., Cohen-Kettenis, P., Delemarre-van de Waal, H. E.,
Gooren, L. J., Meyer, W. J., III, Spack, N. P., . . . Montori, V. M.
(2009). Endocrine treatment of transsexual persons: An Endocrine Society
clinical practice guideline. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology
Metabolism, 94,* 3132--3154. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jc.2009-0345>

Hendricks, M. L., & Testa, R. J. (2012). A conceptual framework for
clinical work with transgender and gender nonconforming clients: An
adaptation of the minority stress model. *Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 43,* 460--467.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029597> Hepp, U., Kraemer, B., Schnyder,
U., Miller, N., & Delsignore, A. (2004). Psychiatric comorbidity in
Gender Identity Disorder. *Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 58,*
259--261. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j
.jpsychores.2004.08.010](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2004.08.010)

Herbst, J. H., Jacobs, E. D., Finlayson, T. J., McKleroy, V. S.,
Neumann, M. S., & Crepaz, N. (2008). Estimating HIV prevalence and risk
behaviors of transgender persons in the United States: A systemic
review. *AIDS & Behavior, 12,* 1--17.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10461007-9299-3](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10461-007-9299-3)

Herdt, G. (1994). *Third sex, third gender, beyond sexual dimorphism in
culture and history*. New York, NY: Zone Books.

Herdt, G., & Boxer, A. (1993). *Children of horizons: How gay and
lesbian teens are leading a new way out of the closet*. Boston, MA:
Beacon Press.

Herman, J. L. (2013). Gendered restrooms and minority stress: The public
regulation of gender and its impact on transgender people's lives.
*Journal of Public Management and Social Policy, 19,* 65--80.

Hidalgo, M. A., Ehrensaft, D., Tishelman, A. C., Clark, L. F., Garafalo,
R., Rosenthal, S. M., . . . Olson, J. (2013). The gender affirmative
model: What we know and what we aim to learn. *Human Development, 56,*
285--290. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/00355235>

Hill, D. B., Menvielle, E., Sica, K. M., & Johnson, A. (2010). An
affirmative intervention for families with gender variant children:
Parental ratings of child mental health and gender. *Journal of Sex &
Marital Therapy, 36,* 6--23.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00926230903375560>

Hirschfeld, M. (1991). *Transvestites: The erotic drive to crossdress*
(M. Lombardi-Nash, trans.). Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books. (Original
work published 1910)

Holman, C., & Goldberg, J. M. (2006). Social and medical transgender
case advocacy. *International Journal of Transgenderism, 9,* 197--217.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J485v09n03_09>

Hughes, I. A., Houk, C., Ahmed, S. F., & Lee, P. A. (2006). Consensus
statement on management of intersex disorders. *Journal of Pediatric
Urology, 2,* 148--162. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpurol.2006.03.004>

Hwahng, S. J., & Lin, A. (2009). The health of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, and questioning people. In C. Trinh-Shevrin, N.
Islam, & M. Rey (Eds.), *Asian American communities and health: Context,
research, policy, and action* (pp. 226--282). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.

Hwahng, S. J., & Nuttbrock, L. (2007). Sex workers, fem queens, and
cross-dressers: Differential marginalizations and HIV vulnerabilities
among three ethnocultural male-to-female transgender communities in New
York City. *Sexuality Research & Social Policy, 4,* 36--59. [http://
dx.doi.org/10.1525/srsp.2007.4.4.36](http://dx.doi.org/10.1525/srsp.2007.4.4.36)

Iantaffi, A., & Bockting, W. O. (2011). Views from both sides of the
bridge? Gender, sexual legitimacy and transgender people's experiences
of relationships. *Culture, Health, & Sexuality, 13,* 355--370.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691058.2010.537770>

Institute of Medicine. (2011). *The health of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender people: Building a foundation for better understanding*.
Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences.

Ippolito, J., & Witten, T. M. (2014). Aging. In L. Erickson-Schroth
(Ed.), *Trans bodies, trans selves: A resource for the transgender
community* (pp. 476--497). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Israel, T. (2005). . . . and sometimes T: Transgender issues in LGBT
psychology. *Newsletter of the Society for the Psychological Study of
Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Issues, 21,* 16--18.

Israel, T., Gorcheva, R., Burnes, T. R., & Walther, W. A. (2008).
Helpful and unhelpful therapy experiences of LGBT clients.
*Psychotherapy*

*Research, 18,* 294--305. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10503300701506920>

Israel, T., Walther, W. A., Gorcheva, R., & Perry, J. S. (2011).
Policies and practices for LGBT clients: Perspectives of mental health
services administrators. *Journal of Gay and Lesbian Mental Health, 15,*
152-- 168. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19359705.2010.539090>

Jones, R. M., Wheelwright, S., Farrell, K., Martin, E., Green, R., Di
Ceglie, D., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2012). Brief report: Female-to-male
transsexual people and autistic traits. *Journal of Autism Developmental
Disorders, 42,* 301--306. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10803-011-1227-8>

Kellogg, T. A., Clements-Nolle, K., Dilley, J., Katz, M. H., &
McFarland, W. (2001). Incidence of human immunodeficiency virus among
maleto-female transgendered persons in San Francisco. *JAIDS Journal of
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 28,* 380--384. [http://dx.doi
.org/10.1097/00126334-200112010-00012](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00126334-200112010-00012)

Kenagy, G. P., & Bostwick, W. B. (2005). Health and social service needs
of transgender people in Chicago. *International Journal of
Transgenderism, 8,* 57--66. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J485v08n02_06>

Kenagy, G. P., & Hsieh, C. (2005). Gender differences in social service
needs of transgender people. *Journal of Social Service Research, 31,*
1--21. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J079v31n303_01>

Keo-Meier, C. L., Herman, L. I., Reisner, S. L., Pardo, S. T., Sharp,
C., Babcock, J. C. (2015). Testosterone treatment and MMPI-2 improvement
in transgender men: A prospective controlled study. *Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 83,* 143--156. [http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/a0037599](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037599)

Kidd, J. D., & Witten, T. M. (2008). Understanding spirituality and
religiosity in the transgender community: Implications for aging.
*Journal of Religion, Spirituality & Aging, 20,* 29--62.
[http://dx.doi.org/10
.1080/15528030801922004](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15528030801922004)

Kins, E., Hoebeke, P., Heylens, G., Rubens, R., & De Cuyprere, G.
(2008). The female-to-male transsexual and his female partner versus the
traditional couple: A comparison. *Journal of Sex and Marital*

*Therapy, 34,* 429--438. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00926230802156236>
Knochel, K. A., Croghan, C. F., Moore, R. P., & Quam, J. K. (2011).
*Ready to serve? The aging network and LGB and T older adults*.
Washington, DC: National Association of Area Agencies on Aging.
Retrieved from <http://www.n4a.org/pdf/ReadyToServe1.pdf>

Knudson, G., De Cuypere, G., & Bockting, W. O. (2010). Recommendations
for revision of the DSM diagnoses of gender identity disorders:
Consensus statement of the World Professional Association for
Transgender Health. *International Journal of Transgenderism, 12,*
115--118. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2010.509215>

Kohlberg, L. (1966). A cognitive-developmental analysis of children's
sex-role concepts and attitudes. In E. E. Maccoby (Ed.), *The
development of sex differences* (pp. 82--173). Stanford, CA: Stanford
University.

Korell, S. C., & Lorah, P. (2007). An overview of affirmative
psychotherapy and counseling with transgender clients. In K. Bieschke,
R. M. Perez, & K. A. DeBord (Eds.), *Handbook of counseling and
psychotherapy with lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender clients* (2nd
ed., pp. 271--288). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Kosciw, J. G., Greytak, E. A., Palmer, N. A., & Boesen, M. J. (2014).
*The 2013 National School Climate Survey: The experiences of lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender youth in our nation's schools*. New York,
NY: Gay, Lesbian & Straight Education Network. Retrieved from
<http://www.glsen.org/sites/default/files/2013%20National%20School%20Climate%20Survey%20Full%20Report_0.pdf>

Krieger, N. (2011). *Nina here nor there: My journey beyond gender*.
Boston, MA: Beacon Press.

Kuhn, A., Brodmer, C., Stadlmayer, W., Kuhn, P., Mueller, M. D., &
Birkhauser, M. (2009). Quality of life 15 years after sex reassignment
surgery for transsexualism. *Fertility and Sterility, 92,* 1685--1689.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.08.126>

Kulick, D. (1998). *Travesti: Sex, gender, and culture among Brazilian
transgendered prostitutes*. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago.

Kuper, L. E., Nussbaum, R., & Mustanski, B. (2012). Exploring the
diversity of gender and sexual orientation identities in an online
sample of transgender individuals. *Journal of Sex Research, 49,*
244--254. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00224499.2011.596954>

Lambda Legal. (2012). *Professional organization statements supporting
transgender people in health care*. Retrieved from
<http://www.lambdalegal.org/sites/default/files/publications/downloads/fs_professional-org-statements-supporting-trans-health_1.pdf>

Lawrence, A. A. (2014). *Men trapped in men's bodies: Narratives of
autogynephilic transsexualism*. New York, NY: Springer.

Lev, A. I. (2004). *Transgender emergence: Therapeutic guidelines for
working with gender-variant people and their families*. New York, NY:
Haworth Clinical Practice.

Lev, A. I. (2009). The ten tasks of the mental health provider:
Recommendations for revision of the World Professional Association for
Transgender Health's Standards of Care. *International Journal of
Transgenderism, 11,* 74--99.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532730903008032>

Levy, D. L., & Lo, J. R. (2013). Transgender, transsexual, and gender
queer individuals with a Christian upbringing: The process of resolving
conflict between gender identity and faith. *Journal of Religion &
Spirituality in Social Work: Social Thought, 32,* 60--83. [http://dx.doi
.org/10.1080/15426432.2013.749079](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15426432.2013.749079)

Liu, R. T., & Mustanski, B. (2012). Suicidal ideation and self-harm in
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth. *American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, 42,* 221--228. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre
.2011.10.023](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2011.10.023)

Lombardi, E. L., Wilchins, R. A., Priesing, D., & Malouf, D. (2001).
Gender violence: Transgender experiences with violence and
discrimination. *Journal of Homosexuality, 42,* 89--101.
[http://dx.doi.org/10
.1300/J082v42n01_05](http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J082v42n01_05)

Lurie, S. (2005). Identifying training needs of health care providers
related to the treatment and care of transgender persons: A qualitative
needs assessment in New England. *International Journal of
Transgenderism, 8,* 93--112. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J485v08n02_09>

MacLaughlin, D. T., & Donahoe, P. K. (2004). Sex determination and
differentiation. *New England Journal of Medicine, 350,* 367--378.
[http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra022784](http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra022784)

Malpas, J. (2011). Between pink and blue: A multi-dimensional family
approach to gender nonconforming children and their families. *Family
Process, 50,* 453--470. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1545-5300.2011
.01371.x](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1545-5300.2011.01371.x)

Matarazzo, B. B., Barnes, S. M., Pease, J. L., Russell, L. M., Hanson,
J. E., Soberay, K. A., & Gutierrez, P. M. (2014). Suicide risk among
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender military personnel and veterans:
What does the literature tell us? *Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 44,* 200--217. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/sltb.12073>

McGuire, J. K., Anderson, C. R., & Toomey, R. B. (2010). School climate
for transgender youth: A mixed method investigation of student
experiences and school responses. *Journal of Youth and Adolescence,
39,* 1175--1188. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10964-010-9540-7>

Meier, S. C., & Labuski, C. M. (2013). The demographics of the
transgender population. In A. K. Baumle (Ed.), *International handbook
of the demography of sexuality* (pp. 289--327). New York, NY: Springer.

Meier, S. C., Pardo, S. T., Labuski, C., & Babcock, J. (2013). Measures
of clinical health among female-to-male transgender persons as a
function of sexual orientation. *Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42,*
463--474. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-012-0052-2>

Meier, S. C., Sharp, C., Michonski, J., Babcock, J. C., & Fitzgerald, K.
(2013). Romantic relationships of female-to-male trans men: A
descriptive study. *International Journal of Transgenderism, 14,*
75--85. [http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2013.791651](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2013.791651)

Merksamer, J. (2011). *A place of respect: A guide for group care
facilities serving transgender and gender non-conforming youth*. San
Francisco, CA: National Center for Lesbian Rights; New York, NY: Sylvia
Rivera Law Project. Retrieved from [http://www.nclrights.org/wp-content/
uploads/2013/07/A_Place_Of_Respect.pdf](http://www.nclrights.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/A_Place_Of_Respect.pdf)

Meyer, I. H. (1995). Minority stress and mental health in gay men.
*Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 36,* 38--56.
[http://dx.doi.org/10 .2307/2137286](http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2137286)

Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in
lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: Conceptual issues and research
evidence. *Psychological Bulletin, 129,* 674--697.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
0033-2909.129.5.674](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.674)

Meyer, W. J. (2009). World Professional Association of Transgender
Health's Standards of Care requirements of hormone therapy for adults
with gender identity disorder. *International Journal of Transgenderism,
11,* 127--132. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532730903008065>

Meyerowitz, J. (2002). *How sex changed: A history of transsexuality in
the United States*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.

Mikalson, P., Pardo, S., & Green, J. (2012). *First do no harm: Reducing
disparities for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and
questioning populations in California*. Retrieved from
[http://www.eqcai.org/atf/
cf/%7B8cca0e2f-faec-46c1-8727-cb02a7d1b3cc%7D/FIRST_DO_NO\_
HARM-LGBTQ_REPORT.PDF](http://www.eqcai.org/atf/cf/%7B8cca0e2f-faec-46c1-8727-cb02a7d1b3cc%7D/FIRST_DO_NO_HARM-LGBTQ_REPORT.PDF)

Miller, J., & Nichols, A. (2012). Identity, sexuality and commercial sex
among Sri Lankan nachchi. *Sexualities, 15,* 554--569.
[http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/1363460712446120](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1363460712446120)

Minter, S. M., & Wald, D. H. (2012). Protecting parental rights. In J.
L. Levi & E. E. Monnin-Browder (Eds.), *Transgender family law: A guide
to effective advocacy* (pp. 63--85) Bloomington, IN: Authorhouse.

Mizock, L., & Mueser, K. T. (2014). Employment, mental health,
internalized stigma, and coping with transphobia among transgender
individuals. *Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity, 1,*
146--158. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000029>

Mlinac, M. E., Sheeran, T. H., Blissmer, B., Lees, F., Martins, D.
(2011). Psychological resilience. In B. Resnick, L. P. Gwyther, & K. A.
Roberto, *Resilience in aging* (pp. 67--87). New York, NY: Springer.

Mollenkott, V. (2001). *Omnigender: A trans-religious approach*.
Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim Press.

Moody, C. L., & Smith, N. G. (2013). Suicide protective factors among
trans adults. *Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42,* 739--752.
[http://dx.doi
.org/10.1007/s10508-013-0099-8](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-013-0099-8)

Morales, E. (2013). Latino lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
immigrants in the United States. *Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling,
7,* 172--184. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15538605.2013.785467>

Murad, M. H., Elamin, M. B., Garcia, M. Z., Mullan, R. J., Murad, A.,
Erwin, P. J., & Montori, V. M. (2010). Hormonal therapy and sex
reassignment: A systemic review and meta-analysis of quality of life
andpsychosocialoutcomes.*ClinicalEndocrinology,72,*214--231.[http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2265.2009.03625.x](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2265.2009.03625.x)

Murray, S. B., Boon, E., & Touyz, S. W. (2013). Diverging eating
psychopathology in transgendered eating disorder patients: A report of
two cases. *Eating Disorders, 21,* 70--74. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
10640266.2013.741989](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10640266.2013.741989)

Mustanski, B. S., Garofalo, R., & Emerson, E. M. (2010). Mental health
disorders, psychological distress, and suicidality in a diverse sample
of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youths. *American Journal of
Public Health, 100,* 2426--2432. [http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2009
.178319](http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2009.178319)

Nadal, K. L., Rivera, D. P., & Corpus, M. J. H. (2010). Sexual
orientation and transgender microaggressions in everyday life:
Experiences of lesbians, gays, bisexuals, and transgender individuals.
In D. W. Sue (Ed.), *Microaggressions and marginality: Manifestation,
dynamics, and impact* (pp. 217--240). New York, NY: Wiley.

Nadal, K. L., Skolnik, A., & Wong, Y. (2012). Interpersonal and systemic
microaggressions toward transgender people: Implications for counseling.
*Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling, 6,* 55--82. [http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/15538605.2012.648583](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15538605.2012.648583)

Namaste, V. K. (2000). *Invisible lives: The erasure of transsexual and
transgendered people*. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago.

Nanda, S. (1999). *Neither man nor woman, the Hijras of India* (2nd
ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.

National Center for Transgender Equality. (2012). *Reassessing
solitary confinement: The human rights, fiscal, and public safety
consequences*. Retrieved from
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/97473428/NCTE-Testimony-on-U-S-Senate-Solitary-Confinement-Hearing>

National Center for Transgender Equality. (2014). *Medicare and
transgender people*. Retrieved from
[http://transequality.org/PDFs/Medicare
AndTransPeople.pdf](http://transequality.org/PDFs/MedicareAndTransPeople.pdf)

National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs. (2011). *Hate violence
against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and HIV-affected
communities in the United States in 2011: A report from the National
Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs*. New York, NY: Author. Retrieved
from [http://avp.org/storage/documents/Reports/2012_NCAVP\_
2011_HV_Report.pdf](http://avp.org/storage/documents/Reports/2012_NCAVP_2011_HV_Report.pdf)

National LGBTQ Task Force. (2013). *Hate crimes laws in the U. S*.
Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from [http://www.thetaskforce.org/
static_html/downloads/reports/issue_maps/hate_crimes_06_13_new.pdf](http://www.thetaskforce.org/static_html/downloads/reports/issue_maps/hate_crimes_06_13_new.pdf)

National Senior Citizens Law Center. (2011). *LGBT older adults in
long-term care facilities: Stories from the field*. Washington, DC:
Author, National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, Services and Advocacy for
GLBT Elders, Lambda Legal, National Center for Lesbian Rights, &
National Center for Transgender Equality. Retrieved from [http://
www.nsclc.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/LGBT-Stories-from-theField.pdf](http://www.nsclc.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/LGBT-Stories-from-the-Field.pdf)

Nemoto, T., Operario, D., Keatley, J. A., Han, L., & Soma, T. (2004).
HIV risk behaviors among male-to-female transgender persons of color in
San Francisco. *American Journal of Public Health, 94,* 1193--1199.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.94.7.1193>

Nemoto, T., Operario, D., Keatley, J., & Villegas, D. (2004). Social
context of HIV risk behaviors among male-to-female transgenders of
color. *AIDS Care, 16,* 724--735. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
09540120413331269567](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09540120413331269567)

Nuttbrock, L. A., Bockting, W. O., Hwahng, S., Rosenblum, A., Mason, M.,
Macri, M., & Becker, J. (2009). Gender identity affirmation among
male-to-female transgender persons: A life course analysis across types
of relationships and cultural/lifestyle factors. *Sexual and
Relationship Therapy, 24,* 108--125.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14681990902926764>

Nuttbrock, L., Hwahng, S., Bockting, W., Rosenblum, A., Mason, M.,
Macri, M., & Becker, J. (2010). Psychiatric impact of gender-related
abuse across the life course of male-to-female transgender persons.
*Journal of Sex Research, 47,* 12--23. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
00224490903062258](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00224490903062258)

O'Hara, C., Dispenza, F., Brack, G., & Blood, R. A. (2013). The
preparedness of counselors in training to work with transgender clients:
A mixed methods investigation. *Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling,
7,* 236--256. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15538605.2013.812929>

Operario, D., Soma, T., & Underhill, K. (2008). Sex work and HIV status
among transgender women: Systematic review and meta-analysis. *Journal
of Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndromes, 48,* 97--103. [http://dx.doi
.org/10.1097/QAI.0b013e31816e3971](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/QAI.0b013e31816e3971)

OutServe-Servicemembers Legal Defense Network. (n.d.). *Transgender
service*. Retrieved from [https://www.outserve-sldn.org/?p.transgender\_
service](http://www.outserve-sldn.org/?p.=transgender_service)

Pinto, R. M., Melendez, R. M., & Spector, A. Y. (2008). Male-to-female
transgender individuals building social support and capital from within
a gender-focused network. *Journal of Gay and Lesbian Social Services,
20,* 203--220. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10538720802235179>

Porter, K. E., Ronneberg, C. R., & Witten, T. M. (2013). Religious
affiliation and successful aging among transgender older adults:
Findings from the Trans MetLife Survey. *Journal of Religion,
Spirituality & Aging, 25,* 112--138.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15528030.2012.739988>

Preves, S. E. (2003). *Intersex and identity: The contested self*. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Pyne, J. (2014). Gender independent kids: A paradigm shift in approaches
to gender non-conforming children. *The Canadian Journal of Human
Sexuality, 23,* 1--8. <http://dx.doi.org/10.3138/cjhs.23.1.CO1>

Rachlin, K. (2002). Transgender individuals' experience of
psychotherapy. *International Journal of Transgenderism, 6*(1).

Reed, G. M., McLaughlin, C. J., & Newman, R. (2002). American
Psychological Association policy in context: The development and
evaluation of guidelines for professional practice. *American
Psychologist, 57,* 1041--1047.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.57.12.1041>

Rodin, D., & Stewart, D. E. (2012). Resilience in elderly survivors of
child maltreatment. *SAGE Open, 2,* 1--9. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
2158244012450293](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/2158244012450293)

Rodriguez, E. M., & Follins, L. D. (2012). Did God make me this way?
Expanding psychological research on queer religiosity and spirituality
to include intersex and transgender individuals. *Psychology &
Sexuality, 3,* 214--225.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19419899.2012.700023>

Ryan, C. (2009). *Supportive families, healthy children: Helping
families with lesbian, gay, bisexual & transgender children*. San
Francisco, CA: Family Acceptance Project, Marian Wright Edelman
Institute, San Francisco State University. Retrieved from
[http://familyproject
.sfsu.edu/files/FAP_English%20Booklet_pst.pdf](http://familyproject.sfsu.edu/files/FAP_English%20Booklet_pst.pdf)

Ryan, C., Russell, S. T., Huebner, D., Diaz, R., & Sanchez, J. (2010).
Family acceptance in adolescence and the health of LGBT young adults.
*Journal of Child and Adolescence and the Health of LGBT Young Adults,
23,* 205--213.

Saffin, L. A. (2011). Identities under siege: Violence against
transpersons of color. In E. A. Stanley & N. Smith (Eds.), *Captive
genders: Trans embodiment and the prison industrial complex* (pp.
141--162). Oakland, CA: AK Press.

Samons, S. (2008). *When the opposite sex isn't: Sexual orientation in
male-to-female transgender people*. New York, NY: Routledge.

Savin-Williams, R. C., & Diamond, L. M. (2000). Sexual identity
trajectories among sexual-minority youths: Gender comparisons. *Archives
of Sexual Behavior, 29,* 607--627.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1002058505138>

Schleifer, D. (2006). Make me feel mighty real: Gay female-to-male
transgenderists negotiating sex, gender, and sexuality. *Sexualities,
9,* 57--75. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1363460706058397>

Schmidt,J.(2003).Paradiselost?SocialchangeandFa'afafineinSamoa.*Current
Sociology, 51,* 417--432.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0011392103051003014>

Serano, J. (2006). *Whipping girl: A transsexual woman on sexism and the
scapegoating of femininity*. Emeryville, CA: Seal Press.

Services and Advocacy for GLBT Elders & National Center for Transgender
Equality. (2012). *Improving the lives of transgender older adults*. New
York, NY: Author. Retrieved from [http://transequality.org/
Resources/TransAgingPolicyReportFull.pdf](http://transequality.org/Resources/TransAgingPolicyReportFull.pdf)

Sevelius, J. (2009). "There's no pamphlet for the kind of sex I have":
HIV-related risk factors and protective behaviors among transgender men
who have sex with non-transgender men. *Journal of the Association of
Nurses in AIDS Care, 20,* 398--410. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jana.2009.06.001](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jana.2009.06.001)

Sheridan, V. (2009). *The complete guide to transgender in the
workplace*. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger.

Sherman, M. D., Kauth, M. R., Shipherd, J. C., & Street, R. L., Jr.
(2014). Communication between VA providers and sexual and gender
minority veterans: A pilot study. *Psychological Services, 11,*
235--242. [http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/a0035840](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0035840)

Shipherd, J. C., Mizock, L., Maguen, S., & Green, K. E. (2012).
Maleto-female transgender veterans and VA health care utilization.
*International Journal of Sexual Health, 24,* 78--87.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
19317611.2011.639440](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19317611.2011.639440)

Shively, M. G., & De Cecco, J. P. (1977). Component of sexual identity.
*Journal of Homosexuality, 3,* 41--48. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/
J082v03n01_04](http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J082v03n01_04)

Siegal, M., & Robinson, J. (1987). Order effects in children's
genderconstancy responses. *Developmental Psychology, 23,* 283--286.
[http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.23.2.283](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.23.2.283)

Singh, A. A. (2012). Transgender youth of color and resilience:
Negotiating oppression, finding support. *Sex Roles: A Journal of
Research, 68,* 690--702. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11199-012-0149-z>

Singh, A. A., & Burnes, T. R. (2009). Creating developmentally
appropriate, safe counseling environments for transgender youth: The
critical role of school counselors. *Journal of LGBT Issues in
Counseling, 3,* 215--234. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15538600903379457>

Singh, A. A., & Burnes, T. R. (2010). Shifting the counselor role from
gatekeeping to advocacy: Ten strategies for using the Competencies for
Counseling with Transgender Clients for individual and social change.
*Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling, 4,* 241--255. [http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/15538605.2010.525455](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15538605.2010.525455)

Singh, A. A., Hays, D. G., & Watson, L. (2011). Strategies in the face
of adversity: Resilience strategies of transgender individuals. *Journal
of Counseling and Development, 89,* 20--27. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/j
.1556-6678.2011.tb00057.x](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6678.2011.tb00057.x)

Singh, A. A., & Jackson, K. (2012). Queer and transgender youth:
Education and liberation in our schools. In E. R. Meiners & T. Quinn
(Eds.), *Sexualities in education: A reader* (pp. 175--186). New York,
NY: Peter Lang.

Singh, A. A., & McKleroy, V. S. (2011). "Just getting out of bed is a
revolutionary act": The resilience of transgender people of color who
have survived traumatic life events. *Traumatology, 20,* 1--11.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1534765610369261>

Singh, A. A., Richmond, K., & Burnes, T. (2013). The practice of ethical
and empowering participatory action research with transgender people and
communities. *International Journal of Transgenderism, 14,* 93-- 104.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2013.818516>

Smith, L. C., Shin, R. Q., & Officer, L. M. (2012). Moving counseling
forward on LGB and transgender issues: Speaking queerly on discourses
and microaggressions. *The Counseling Psychologist, 40,* 385-- 408.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0011000011403165>

Spade, D. (2006). Compliance is gendered: Struggling for gender
selfdetermination in a hostile economy. In P. Currah, R. M. Juang, & S.
P. Minter (Eds.), *Transgender rights* (pp. 217--241). Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.

Spade, D. (2011a). *Normal life: Administrative violence, critical trans
politics, and the limits of the law*. Brooklyn, NY: South End.

Spade, D. (2011b). Some very basic tips for making higher education more
accessible to trans students and rethinking how we talk about gendered
bodies. *Radical Teacher, 92,* 57--62.

Stanley, E. A. (2011). Fugitive flesh: Gender self-determination, queer
abolition, and trans resistance. In E. A. Stanley & N. Smith (Eds.),
*Captive genders: Trans embodiment and the prison industrial complex*
(pp. 1--11). Oakland, CA: AK Press.

Steensma, T. D., McGuire, J. K., Kreukels, B. P., Beekman, A. J., &
Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2013). Factors associated with desistence and
persistence of childhood Gender Dysphoria: A quantitative follow-up
study. *Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 52,* 582--590. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2013.03.016>

Stein, E. (2012). Commentary on the treatment of gender variance and
gender dysphoria in children and adolescents: Common themes and ethical
reflections. *Journal of Homosexuality, 59,* 480--500.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2012.653316>

Stryker, S. (2008). *Transgender history*. Berkley, CA: Seal Press.

Tanis, J. E. (2003). *Trans-gendered: Theology, ministry, and
communities of faith*. Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim.

Taylor, J. K. (2007). Transgender identities and public policy in the
United States: The relevance for public administration. *Administration*
*& Society, 39,* 833--856. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0095399707305548k>

Testa, R. J., Sciacca, L. M., Wang, F., Hendricks, M. L., Goldblum, P.,
Bradford, J., & Bongar, B. (2012). Effects of violence on transgender
people. *Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 43,* 452--459.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029604>

Tishelman, A. C., Kaufman, R., Edwards-Leeper, L., Mandel, F. H.,
Shumer, D. H., & Spack, N. P. (2015). Serving transgender youth:
Challenges, dilemmas, and clinical examples. *Professional Psychology:*
*Research and Practice, 46,* 37--45.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037490>

Transgender Law Center. (2005). *Peeing in peace: A resource guide for
transgender activists and allies*. San Francisco, CA: Author. Retrieved
from <http://transgenderlawcenter.org/issues/public-accomodations/peeing-in-peace>

Transgender Law Center. (n.d.). *Transgender health benefits:
Negotiating inclusive coverage*. Retrieved from
[http://translaw.wpengine.com/
issues/health/healthinsurance](http://translaw.wpengine.com/issues/health/healthinsurance)

Travers, R., Bauer, G., Pyne, J., Bradley, K., Gale, L., & Papaimitriou,
M. (2012). *Impacts of strong parental support for trans youth: A report
prepared for Children's Aid Society of Toronto and Delisle Youth
Services*. Retrieved from
<http://transpulseproject.ca/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/Impacts-of-Strong-Parental-Support-for-Trans-Youth-vFINAL.pdf>

Vanderburgh, R. (2007). *Transition and beyond: Observations on gender
identity*. Portland, OR: Q Press.

van Kesteren, P. J. M., Asscheman, H., Megens, J. O. J., & Gooren, L. J.
G. (1997). Mortality and morbidity in transsexual subjects treated with
cross-sex hormones. *Clinical Endocrinology, 47,* 337--342. http://
[dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2265.1997.2601068.x](http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2265.1997.2601068.x)

Vasquez, M. J. T. (2007). Cultural difference and the therapeutic
alliance: An evidence-based analysis. *American Psychologist, 62,*
878--885. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.8.878>

Wahl, H. W., Iwarsson, S., & Oswald, F. (2012). Aging well and the
environment: Toward and integrative model and research agenda for the
future. *The Gerontologist, 52,* 306--316. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
geront/gnr154](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geront/gnr154)

Walinsky, D., & Whitcomb, D. (2010). Using the ACA Competencies for
counseling with transgender clients to increase rural transgender
wellbeing. *Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling, 4,* 160--175.
[http://dx.doi
.org/10.1080/15538605.2010.524840](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15538605.2010.524840)

Wallace, R., & Russell, H. (2013). Attachment and shame in
gender-nonconforming children and their families: Toward a theoretical
framework for evaluating clinical interventions. *International Journal
of Transgenderism, 14,* 113--126.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2013.824845>

Wallien, M. S. C., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2008). Psychosexual outcome
of gender-dysphoric children. *Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47,* 1413--1423. [http://dx.doi.org/10
.1097/CHI.0b013e31818956b9](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/CHI.0b013e31818956b9)

Warner, L. R. (2008). A best practices guide to intersectional
approaches in psychological research. *Sex Roles: A Journal of Research,
59,* 454--463. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1475-9276-9-5>

Wentling, T., Schilt, K., Windsor, E., & Lucal, B. (2008). Teaching
transgender. *Teaching Sociology, 36,* 49--57.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0092055X0803600107](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0092055X0803600107)

White, T., & Ettner, R. (2004). Disclosure, risks and protective factors
for children whose parents are undergoing a gender transition. *Journal
of Gay and Lesbian Psychotherapy, 8,* 129--147.

White, T., & Ettner, R. (2007). Adaptation and adjustment in children of
transsexual parents. *European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 16,*
215--221. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00787-006-0591-y>

Whitman, J. (2013). Safe schools: Prevention and intervention for
bullying and harassment. In E. Fisher & K. Hawkins (Eds.), *Creating
school environments to support lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and
questioning students and families: A handbook for school professionals*
(pp. 123--139). New York, NY: Routledge.

Wierckx, K., Van Caenegem, E., Pennings, G., Elaut, E., Dedecker, D.,
Van de Peer, F., . . . T'Sjoen, G. (2012). Reproductive wish in
transsexual men. *Human Reproduction, 27,* 483--487. [http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/humrep/der406](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/humrep/der406)

Witten, T. M. (2003). Life course analysis---The courage to search for
something more: Middle adulthood issues in the transgender and intersex
community. *Journal of Human Behavior in the Social Environment, 8,*
189--224. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J137v8no2_12>

Witten, T. M., & Eyler, A. E. (2012). *Gay, lesbian, bisexual, and
transgender aging: Challenges in research, practice, and policy*.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University.

World Health Organization. (2015). *Transsexualism F64.0*. Retrieved
from
[http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2015/en#/F64.0](http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2015/en%23/F64.0)

Xavier, J. M. (2000). *The Washington, DC Transgender Needs Assessment
Survey*. Washington, DC: Us Helping Us, People Into Living. Retrieved
from <http://www.glaa.org/archive/2000/tgneedsassessment1112.shtml>

Xavier, J., Bobbin, M., Singer, B., & Budd, E. (2005). A needs
assessment of transgendered people of color living in Washington, DC.
*International Journal of Transgenderism, 8,* 31--47.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/
J485v08n02_04](http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J485v08n02_04)

Xavier, J., Bradford, J., Hendricks, M., Safford, L., McKee, R., Martin,
E., & Honnold, J. A. (2012). Transgender health care access of Virginia:
A qualitative study. *International Journal of Transgenderism, 14,*
3--17. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15532739.2013.689513>

Zucker, K. J. (2008a). Children with gender identity disorder. Is there
a best practice? *Neuropsychiatrie de l'Enfance et de l'Adolescence,
56,* 358--364. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neurenf.2008.06.003

Zucker, K. J. (2008b). On the "natural history" of gender identity
disorder in children \[Editorial\]. *Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47,* 1361--1363.
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/CHI
.0b013e31818960cf](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/CHI.0b013e31818960cf)

Zucker, K. J., & Bradley, S. J. (1995). *Gender identity disorder and
psychosexual problems in children and adolescents*. New York, NY:
Guilford Press.

Zucker, K. J., Wood, H., Singh, D., & Bradley, S. J. (2012). A
developmental, biopsychosocial model for the treatment of children with
Gender Identity Disorder. *Journal of Homosexuality, 59,* 369--397.
[http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2012.653309](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2012.653309)

---

## Appendix A

### Definitions

Terminology within the health care field and transgender and gender
nonconforming (TGNC) communities is constantly evolving (Coleman et al.,
2012). The evolution of terminology has been especially rapid in the
last decade, as the profession's awareness of gender diversity has
increased, as more literature and research in this area has been
published, and as voices of the TGNC community have strengthened. Some
terms or definitions are not universally accepted, and there is some
disagreement among professionals and communities as to the "correct"
words or definitions, depending on theoretical orientation, geographic
region, generation, or culture, with some terms seen as affirming and
others as outdated or demeaning. American Psychological Association
(APA) Task Force for *Guidelines for Psychological Practice with
Transgender and Gender Nonconforming People* developed the definitions
below by reviewing existing definitions put forward by professional
organizations (e.g., APA Task Force on Gender Identity and Gender
Variance, 2009; the Institute of Medicine, 2011; and the World
Professional Association for Transgender Health

\[Coleman et al., 2012\]), health care agencies serving TGNC clients
(e.g., Fenway Health Center), TGNC community resources (Gender Equity
Resource Center, National Center for Transgender Equality), and
professional literature. Psychologists are encouraged to refresh their
knowledge and familiarity with evolving terminology on a regular basis
as changes emerge in the community and/or the professional literature.
The definitions below include terms frequently used within the
*Guidelines*, by the TGNC community, and within professional literature.

**Ally:** a cisgender person who supports and advocates for TGNC people
and/or communities.

**Antitrans prejudice (transprejudice, transnegativity, transphobia):**
prejudicial attitudes that may result in the devaluing, dislike, and
hatred of people whose gender identity and/or gender expression do not
conform to their sex assigned at birth. Antitrans prejudice may lead to
discriminatory behaviors in such areas as employment and public
accommodations, and may lead to harassment and violence. When TGNC
people hold these negative attitudes about themselves and their gender
identity, it is called *internalized transphobia* (a construct analogous
to internalized homophobia). Transmisogyny describes a simultaneous
experience of sexism and antitrans prejudice with particularly adverse
effects on trans women.

**Cisgender:** an adjective used to describe a person whose gender
identity and gender expression align with sex assigned at birth; a
person who is not TGNC.

**Cisgenderism:** a systemic bias based on the ideology that gender
expression and gender identities are determined by sex assigned at birth
rather than self-identified gender identity. Cisgenderism may lead to
prejudicial attitudes and discriminatory behaviors toward TGNC people or
to forms of behavior or gender expression that lie outside of the
traditional gender binary.

**Coming out:** a process by which individuals affirm and actualize a
stigmatized identity. Coming out as TGNC can include disclosing a gender
identity or gender history that does not align with sex assigned at
birth or current gender expression. Coming out is an individual process
and is partially influenced by one's age and other generational
influences.

**Cross dressing:** wearing clothing, accessories, and/or make-up,
and/or adopting a gender expression not associated with a person's
assigned sex at birth according to cultural and environmental standards
(Bullough & Bullough, 1993). Cross-dressing is not always reflective of
gender identity or sexual orientation. People who crossdress may or may
not identify with the larger TGNC community.

**Disorders of sex development (DSD, Intersex):** term used to describe
a variety of medical conditions associated with atypical development of
an individual's physical sex characteristics (Hughes, Houk, Ahmed, &
Lee, 2006). These conditions may involve differences of a person's
internal and/or external reproductive organs, sex chromosomes, and/or
sex-related hormones that may complicate sex assignment at birth. DSD
conditions may be considered variations in biological diversity rather
than disorders (M. Diamond, 2009); therefore some prefer the terms
*intersex*, *intersexuality*, or *differences in sex development* rather
than "disorders of sex development" (Coleman et al., 2012).

**Drag:** the act of adopting a gender expression, often as part of a
performance. Drag may be enacted as a political comment on gender, as
parody, or as entertainment, and is not necessarily reflective of gender
identity.

**Female-to-male (FTM):** individuals assigned a female sex at birth who
have changed, are changing, or wish to change their body and/or gender
identity to a more masculine body or gender identity. FTM persons are
also often referred to as *transgender men*, *transmen*, or *trans men*.

**Gatekeeping:** the role of psychologists and other mental health
professionals of evaluating a TGNC person's eligibility and readiness
for hormone therapy or surgery according to the Standards of Care set
forth by the World Professional Association for Transgender Health
(Coleman et al., 2012). In the past, this role has been perceived as
limiting a TGNC adult's autonomy and contributing to mistrust between
psychologists and TGNC clients. Current approaches are sensitive to this
history and are more affirming of a TGNC adult's autonomy in making
decisions with regard to medical transition (American Counseling
Association, 2010; Coleman et al., 2012; Singh & Burnes, 2010).

**Gender-affirming surgery (sex reassignment surgery or gender
reassignment surgery):** surgery to change primary and/or secondary sex
characteristics to better align a person's physical appearance with
their gender identity. Gender-affirming surgery can be an important part
of medically necessary treatment to alleviate gender dysphoria and may
include mastectomy, hysterectomy, metoidioplasty, phalloplasty, breast
augmentation, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, facial feminization surgery,
and/or other surgical procedures.

**Gender binary:** the classification of gender into two discrete
categories of boy/man and girl/woman.

**Gender dysphoria:** discomfort or distress related to incongruence
between a person's gender identity, sex assigned at birth, gender
identity, and/or primary and secondary sex characteristics (Knudson, De
Cuypere, & Bockting, 2010). In 2013, the fifth edition of the
*Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders* (*DSM--5*;
American Psychiatric Association, 2013) adopted the term *gender
dysphoria* as a diagnosis characterized by "a marked incongruence
between" a person's gender assigned at birth and gender identity
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 453). Gender dysphoria
replaced the diagnosis of gender identity disorder (GID) in the previous
version of the *DSM* (American Psychiatric Association, 2000).

**Gender expression:** the presentation of an individual, including
physical appearance, clothing choice and accessories, and behaviors that
express aspects of gender identity or role. Gender expression may or may
not conform to a person's gender identity.

**Gender identity:** a person's deeply felt, inherent sense of being a
boy, a man, or male; a girl, a woman, or female; or an alternative
gender (e.g., genderqueer, gender nonconforming, gender neutral) that
may or may not correspond to a person's sex assigned at birth or to a
person's primary or secondary sex characteristics. Because gender
identity is internal, a person's gender identity is not necessarily
visible to others. "Affirmed gender identity" refers to a person's
gender identity after coming out as TGNC or undergoing a social and/or
medical transition process.

**Gender marker:** an indicator (M, F) of a person's sex or gender found
on identification (e.g., driver's license, passport) and other legal
documents (e.g., birth certificate, academic transcripts).

**Gender nonconforming (GNC):** an adjective used as an umbrella term to
describe people whose gender expression or gender identity differs from
gender norms associated with their assigned birth sex. Subpopulations of
the TGNC community can develop specialized language to represent their
experience and culture, such as the term "masculine of center" (MOC;
Cole & Han, 2011) that is used in communities of color to describe one's
GNC identity.

**Gender questioning:** an adjective to describe people who may be
questioning or exploring their gender identity and whose gender identity
may not align with their sex assigned at birth.

**Genderqueer:** a term to describe a person whose gender identity does
not align with a binary understanding of gender (i.e., a person who does
not identify fully as either a man or a woman). People who identify as
genderqueer may redefine gender or decline to define themselves as
gendered altogether. For example, people who identify as genderqueer may
think of themselves as both man and woman (bigender, pangender,
androgyne); neither man nor woman (genderless, gender neutral, neutrois,
agender); moving between genders (genderfluid); or embodying a third
gender.

**Gender role:** refers to a pattern of appearance, personality, and
behavior that, in a given culture, is associated with being a
boy/man/male or being a girl/woman/female. The appearance, personality,
and behavior characteristics may or may not conform to what is expected
based on a person's sex assigned at birth according to cultural and
environmental standards. Gender role may also refer to the *social* role
in which one is living (e.g., as a woman, a man, or another gender),
with some role characteristics conforming and others not conforming to
what is associated with girls/women or boys/men in a given culture and
time.

**Hormone therapy (gender-affirming hormone therapy, hormone replacement
therapy):** the use of hormones to masculinize or feminize a person's
body to better align that person's physical characteristics with their
gender identity. People wishing to feminize their body receive
antiandrogens and/or estrogens; people wishing to masculinize their body
receive testosterone. Hormone therapy may be an important part of
medically necessary treatment to alleviate gender dysphoria.

**Male-to-female (MTF):** individuals whose assigned sex at birth was
male and who have changed, are changing, or wish to change their body
and/or gender role to a more feminized body or gender role. MTF persons
are also often referred to as *transgender women*, *transwomen*, or
*trans women*.

**Passing:** the ability to blend in with cisgender people without being
recognized as transgender based on appearance or gender role and
expression; being perceived as cisgender. Passing may or may not be a
goal for all TGNC people.

**Puberty suppression (puberty blocking, puberty delaying therapy):** a
treatment that can be used to temporarily suppress the development of
secondary sex characteristics that occur during puberty in youth,
typically using gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues. Puberty
suppression may be an important part of medically necessary treatment to
alleviate gender dysphoria. Puberty suppression can provide adolescents
time to determine whether they desire less reversible medical
intervention and can serve as a diagnostic tool to determine if further
medical intervention is warranted.

**Sex (sex assigned at birth):** sex is typically assigned at birth (or
before during ultrasound) based on the appearance of external genitalia.
When the external genitalia are ambiguous, other indicators (e.g.,
internal genitalia, chromosomal and hormonal sex) are considered to
assign a sex, with the aim of assigning a sex that is most likely to be
congruent with the child's gender identity (MacLaughlin & Donahoe,
2004). For most people, gender identity is congruent with sex assigned
at birth (see *cisgender*); for TGNC individuals, gender identity
differs in varying degrees from sex assigned at birth.

**Sexual orientation:** a component of identity that includes a person's
sexual and emotional attraction to another person and the behavior
and/or social affiliation that may result from this attraction. A person
may be attracted to men, women, both, neither, or to people who are
genderqueer, androgynous, or have other gender identities. Individuals
may identify as lesbian, gay, heterosexual, bisexual, queer, pansexual,
or asexual, among others.

**Stealth (going stealth):** a phrase used by some TGNC people across
the life span (e.g., children, adolescents) who choose to make a
transition in a new environment (e.g., school) in their affirmed gender
without openly sharing their identity as a TGNC person.

**TGNC:** an abbreviation used to refer to people who are transgender or
gender nonconforming.

**Trans:** common short-hand for the terms transgender, transsexual,
and/or gender nonconforming. Although the term "trans" is commonly
accepted, not all transsexual or gender nonconforming people identify as
trans.

**Trans-affirmative:** being respectful, aware and supportive of the
needs of TGNC people.

**Transgender:** an adjective that is an umbrella term used to describe
the full range of people whose gender identity and/or gender role do not
conform to what is typically associated with their sex assigned at
birth. Although the term "transgender" is commonly accepted, not all
TGNC people self-identify as transgender.

**Transgender man, trans man, or transman:** a person whose sex assigned
at birth was female, but who identifies as a man (see FTM).

**Transgender woman, trans woman, or transwoman:** a person whose sex
assigned at birth was male, but who identifies as a woman (see MTF).

**Transition:** a process some TGNC people progress through when they
shift toward a gender role that differs from the one associated with
their sex assigned at birth. The length, scope, and process of
transition are unique to each person's life situation. For many people,
this involves developing a gender role and expression that is more
aligned with their gender identity. A transition typically occurs over a
period of time; TGNC people may proceed through a social transition
(e.g., changes in gender expression, gender role, name, pronoun, and
gender marker) and/or a medical transition (e.g., hormone therapy,
surgery, and/or other interventions).

**Transsexual:** term to describe TGNC people who have changed or are
changing their bodies through medical interventions (e.g., hormones,
surgery) to better align their bodies with a gender identity that is
different than their sex assigned at birth. Not all people who identify
as transsexual consider themselves to be TGNC. For example, some
transsexual individuals identify as female or male, without identifying
as TGNC. Transsexualism is used as a medical diagnosis in the World
Health Organization's (2015) International Classification of Diseases
version 10.

**Two-spirit:** term used by some Native American cultures to describe
people who identify with both male and female gender roles; this can
include both gender identity and sexual orientation. Two-spirit people
are often respected and carry unique spiritual roles for their
community.

---

## Appendix B

### Guidelines for Psychological Practice With Transgender and Gender Nonconforming People
 
# Foundational Knowledge and Awareness

Guideline 1. Psychologists understand that gender is a nonbinary
construct that allows for a range of gender identities and that a
person's gender identity may not align with sex assigned at birth.

Guideline 2. Psychologists understand that gender identity and sexual
orientation are distinct but interrelated constructs.

Guideline 3. Psychologists seek to understand how gender identity
intersects with the other cultural identities of TGNC people.

Guideline 4. Psychologists are aware of how their attitudes about and
knowledge of gender identity and gender expression may affect the
quality of care they provide to TGNC people and their families.

### Stigma, Discrimination, and Barriers to Care

Guideline 5. Psychologists recognize how stigma, prejudice,
discrimination, and violence affect the health and well-being of TGNC
people.

Guideline 6. Psychologists strive to recognize the influence of
institutional barriers on the lives of TGNC people and to assist in
developing TGNC-affirmative environments.

Guideline 7. Psychologists understand the need to promote social change
that reduces the negative effects of stigma on the health and well-being
of TGNC people.

### Life Span Development

Guideline 8. Psychologists working with gender-questioning and TGNC
youth understand the different developmental needs of children and
adolescents and that not all youth will persist in a TGNC identity into
adulthood.

Guideline 9. Psychologists strive to understand both the particular
challenges that TGNC elders experience and the resilience they can
develop.

### Assessment, Therapy, and Intervention

Guideline 10. Psychologists strive to understand how mental health
concerns may or may not be related to a TGNC person's gender identity
and the psychological effects of minority stress.

Guideline 11. Psychologists recognize that TGNC people are more likely
to experience positive life outcomes when they receive social support or
trans-affirmative care.

Guideline 12. Psychologists strive to understand the effects that
changes in gender identity and gender expression have on the romantic
and sexual relationships of TGNC people.

Guideline 13. Psychologists seek to understand how parenting and family
formation among TGNC people take a variety of forms.

Guideline 14. Psychologists recognize the potential benefits of an
interdisciplinary approach when providing care to TGNC people and strive
to work collaboratively with other providers.

### Research, Education, and Training

Guideline 15. Psychologists respect the welfare and rights of TGNC
participants in research and strive to represent results accurately and
avoid misuse or misrepresentation of findings.

Guideline 16. Psychologists Seek to Prepare Trainees in Psychology to
Work Competently With TGNC People.

---

### Suggested citation:

#### American Psychological Association. (2015). Guidelines for Psychological Practice with Transgender and Gender Nonconforming People. *American Psychologist*, 70 (9), 832-864. doi: 10.1037/a0039906

[^1]: For the purposes of these guidelines, we use the term *transgender
    and gender nonconforming* (TGNC). We intend for the term to be as
    broadly inclusive as possible, and recognize that some TGNC people
    do not ascribe to these terms. Readers are referred to Appendix A
    for a listing of terms that include various TGNC identity labels.

[^2]: For the purposes of these guidelines, "youth" refers to both
    children and adolescents under the age of 18.

[^3]: The third person plural pronouns "they," "them," and "their" in
    some instances function in these guidelines as third-person singular
    pronouns to model a common technique used to avoid the use of
    gendered pronouns when speaking to or about TGNC people.

[^4]: Gender-questioning youth are differentiated from TGNC youth in
    this section of the guidelines. Gender-questioning youth may be
    questioning or exploring their gender identity but have not yet
    developed a TGNC identity. As such, they may not be eligible for
    some services that would be offered to TGNC youth.
    Gender-questioning youth are included here because gender
    questioning may lead to a TGNC identity.
